# A Pragmatic Philosophy

This book is about you.

Make no mistake, it is your career, and more importantly, Topic 1, It’s Your Life . You own it. You’re here because you know you can become a better developer and help others become better as well. You can become a Pragmatic Programmer .

What distinguishes Pragmatic Programmers? We feel it’s an attitude, a style, a philosophy of approaching problems and their solutions. They think beyond the immediate problem, placing it in its larger context and seeking out the bigger picture. After all, without this larger context, how can you be pragmatic? How can you make intelligent compromises and informed decisions?

Another key to their success is that Pragmatic Programmers take responsibility for everything they do, which we discuss in Topic 2, The Cat Ate My Source Code . Being responsible, Pragmatic Programmers won’t sit idly by and watch their projects fall apart through neglect. In Topic 3, Software Entropy , we tell you how to keep your projects pristine.

Most people find change difficult, sometimes for good reasons,

sometimes because of plain old inertia. In Topic 4, Stone Soup and Boiled Frogs , we look at a strategy for instigating change and (in the interests of balance) present the cautionary tale of an amphibian that ignored the dangers of gradual change.

One of the benefits of understanding the context in which you work is that it becomes easier to know just how good your software has to be. Sometimes near-perfection is the only option, but often there are trade-offs involved. We explore this in Topic 5, Good-Enough Software .

Of course, you need to have a broad base of knowledge and experience to pull all of this off. Learning is a continuous and ongoing process. In Topic 6, Your Knowledge Portfolio , we discuss some strategies for keeping the momentum up.

Finally, none of us works in a vacuum. We all spend a large amount of time interacting with others. Topic 7, Communicate! lists ways we can do this better.

Pragmatic programming stems from a philosophy of pragmatic thinking. This chapter sets the basis for that philosophy.

> I’m not in this world to live up to your expectations and you’re not in this world to live up to mine. Bruce Lee

## Topic 1. It’s Your Life

It is your life. You own it. You run it. You create it.

Many developers we talk to are frustrated. Their concerns are varied. Some feel they’re stagnating in their job, others that technology has passed them by. Folks feel they are under appreciated, or underpaid, or that their teams are toxic. Maybe they want to move to Asia, or Europe, or work from home.

And the answer we give is always the same.

“Why can’t you change it?”

Software development must appear close to the top of any list of careers where you have control. Our skills are in demand, our knowledge crosses geographic boundaries, we can work remotely. We’re paid well. We really can do just about anything we want.

But, for some reason, developers seem to resist change. They hunker down, and hope things will get better. They look on, passively, as their skills become dated and complain that their companies don’t train them. They look at ads for exotic locations on the bus, then step off into the chilling rain and

trudge into work.

So here’s the most important tip in the book.

### You Have Agency

Does your work environment suck? Is your job boring? Try to fix it. But don’t try forever. As Martin Fowler says, “you can [3] change your organization or change your organization.”

If technology seems to be passing you by, make time (in your own time) to study new stuff that looks interesting. You’re investing in yourself, so doing it while you’re off-the-clock is only reasonable.

Want to work remotely? Have you asked? If they say no, then find someone who says yes.

This industry gives you a remarkable set of opportunities. Be proactive, and take them.

### Related Sections Include

Topic 4, Stone Soup and Boiled Frogs

Topic 6, Your Knowledge Portfolio

> The greatest of all weaknesses is the fear of appearing weak. J.B. Bossuet, Politics from Holy Writ, 1709
