## Topic 2. The Cat Ate My Source Code

One of the cornerstones of the pragmatic philosophy is the idea of taking responsibility for yourself and your actions in terms of your career advancement, your learning and education, your project, and your day-to-day work. Pragmatic Programmers take charge of their own career, and aren’t afraid to admit ignorance or error. It’s not the most pleasant aspect of programming, to be sure, but it will happen—even on the best of projects. Despite thorough testing, good documentation, and solid automation, things go wrong. Deliveries are late. Unforeseen technical problems come up.

These things happen, and we try to deal with them as professionally as we can. This means being honest and direct. We can be proud of our abilities, but we must own up to our shortcomings—our ignorance and our mistakes.

### Team Trust

Above all, your team needs to be able to trust and rely on you— and you need to be comfortable relying on each of them as well. Trust in a team is absolutely essential for creativity and [4] collaboration according to the research literature.  In a healthy environment based in trust, you can safely speak your mind, present your ideas, and rely on your team members who can in

turn rely on you. Without trust, well…

Imagine a high-tech, stealth ninja team infiltrating the villain’s evil lair. After months of planning and delicate execution, you’ve made it on site. Now it’s your turn to set up the laser guidance grid: “Sorry, folks, I don’t have the laser. The cat was playing with the red dot and I left it at home.”

That sort of breach of trust might be hard to repair.

### Take Responsibility

Responsibility is something you actively agree to. You make a commitment to ensure that something is done right, but you don’t necessarily have direct control over every aspect of it. In addition to doing your own personal best, you must analyze the situation for risks that are beyond your control. You have the right not to take on a responsibility for an impossible situation, or one in which the risks are too great, or the ethical implications too sketchy. You’ll have to make the call based on your own values and judgment.

When you do accept the responsibility for an outcome, you should expect to be held accountable for it. When you make a mistake (as we all do) or an error in judgment, admit it honestly and try to offer options.

Don’t blame someone or something else, or make up an excuse. Don’t blame all the problems on a vendor, a programming language, management, or your coworkers. Any and all of these may play a role, but it is up to you to provide solutions, not excuses.

If there was a risk that the vendor wouldn’t come through for

you, then you should have had a contingency plan. If your mass storage melts—taking all of your source code with it—and you don’t have a backup, it’s your fault. Telling your boss “the cat ate my source code’’ just won’t cut it.

### Provide Options, Don’t Make Lame Excuses

Before you approach anyone to tell them why something can’t be done, is late, or is broken, stop and listen to yourself. Talk to the rubber duck on your monitor, or the cat. Does your excuse sound reasonable, or stupid? How’s it going to sound to your boss?

Run through the conversation in your mind. What is the other person likely to say? Will they ask, “Have you tried this…” or “Didn’t you consider that?” How will you respond? Before you go and tell them the bad news, is there anything else you can try? Sometimes, you just know what they are going to say, so save them the trouble.

Instead of excuses, provide options. Don’t say it can’t be done; explain what can be done to salvage the situation. Does code have to be deleted? Tell them so, and explain the value of refactoring (see Topic 40, Refactoring ).

Do you need to spend time prototyping to determine the best way to proceed (see Topic 13, Prototypes and Post-it Notes )? Do you need to introduce better testing (see Topic 41, Test to Code , and Ruthless and Continuous Testing ) or automation to prevent it from happening again?

Perhaps you need additional resources to complete this task. Or

maybe you need to spend more time with the users? Or maybe it’s just you: do you need to learn some technique or technology in greater depth? Would a book or a course help? Don’t be afraid to ask, or to admit that you need help.

Try to flush out the lame excuses before voicing them aloud. If you must, tell your cat first. After all, if little Tiddles is going to take the blame….

### Related Sections Include

Topic 49, Pragmatic Teams

### Challenges

How do you react when someone—such as a bank teller, an auto mechanic, or a clerk—comes to you with a lame excuse? What do you think of them and their company as a result?

When you find yourself saying, “I don’t know,” be sure to follow it up with “—but I’ll find out.” It’s a great way to admit what you don’t know, but then take responsibility like a pro.
