# A Pragmatic Approach

There are certain tips and tricks that apply at all levels of software development, processes that are virtually universal, and ideas that are almost axiomatic. However, these approaches are rarely documented as such; you’ll mostly find them written down as odd sentences in discussions of design, project management, or coding. But for your convenience, we’ll bring these ideas and processes together here.

The first and maybe most important topic gets to the heart of software development: Topic 8, The Essence of Good Design . Everything follows from this.

The next two sections, Topic 9, DRY—The Evils of Duplication and Topic 10, Orthogonality , are closely related. The first warns you not to duplicate knowledge throughout your systems, the second not to split any one piece of knowledge across multiple system components.

As the pace of change increases, it becomes harder and harder to keep our applications relevant. In Topic 11, Reversibility , we’ll look at some techniques that help insulate your projects from their changing environment.

The next two sections are also related. In Topic 12, Tracer Bullets , we talk about a style of development that allows you to gather requirements, test designs, and implement code at the same time. It’s the only way to keep up with the pace of modern life.

Topic 13, Prototypes and Post-it Notes shows you how to use prototyping to test architectures, algorithms, interfaces, and ideas. In the modern world, it’s critical to test ideas and get feedback before you commit to them whole-heartedly.

As computer science slowly matures, designers are producing increasingly higher-level languages. While the compiler that accepts “make it so” hasn’t yet been invented, in Topic 14, Domain Languages we present some more modest suggestions that you can implement for yourself.

Finally, we all work in a world of limited time and resources. You can survive these scarcities better (and keep your bosses or clients happier) if you get good at working out how long things will take, which we cover in Topic 15, Estimating .

Keep these fundamental principles in mind during development, and you’ll write code that’s better, faster, and stronger. You can even make it look easy.

## Topic 8. The Essence of Good Design

The world is full of gurus and pundits, all eager to pass on their hard-earned wisdom when it comes to How to Design Software. There are acronyms, lists (which seem to favor five entries), patterns, diagrams, videos, talks, and (the internet being the internet) probably a cool series on the Law of Demeter explained using interpretive dance.

And we, your gentle authors, are guilty of this too. But we’d like to make amends by explaining something that only became apparent to us fairly recently. First, the general statement:

### Good Design Is Easier to Change Than Bad Design

A thing is well designed if it adapts to the people who use it. For code, that means it must adapt by changing. So we believe in the ETC principle: Easier to Change . ETC . That’s it.

As far as we can tell, every design principle out there is a special case of ETC.

Why is decoupling good? Because by isolating concerns we make each easier to change. ETC.

Why is the single responsibility principle useful? Because a change in requirements is mirrored by a change in just one module. ETC.

Why is naming important? Because good names make code easier to read, and you have to read it to change it. ETC!

### Etc Is A Value, Not A Rule

Values are things that help you make decisions: should I do this, or that? When it comes to thinking about software, ETC is a guide, helping you choose between paths. Just like all your other values, it should be floating just behind your conscious thought, subtly nudging you in the right direction.

But how do you make that happen? Our experience is that it requires some initial conscious reinforcement. You may need to spend a week or so deliberately asking yourself “did the thing I just did make the overall system easier or harder to change?” Do it when you save a file. Do it when you write a test. Do it when you fix a bug.

There’s an implicit premise in ETC. It assumes that a person can tell which of many paths will be easier to change in the future. Much of the time, common sense will be correct, and you can make an educated guess.

Sometimes, though, you won’t have a clue. That’s OK. In those cases, we think you can do two things.

First, given that you’re not sure what form change will take, you can always fall back on the ultimate “easy to change” path: try to make what you write replaceable. That way, whatever happens in the future, this chunk of code won’t be a roadblock. It seems extreme, but actually it’s what you should be doing all the time, anyway. It’s really just thinking about keeping code decoupled and cohesive.

Second, treat this as a way to develop instincts. Note the situation in your engineering day book: the choices you have, and some guesses about change. Leave a tag in the source. Then, later, when this code has to change, you’ll be able to look back and give yourself feedback. It might help the next time you reach a similar fork in the road.

The rest of the sections in this chapter have specific ideas on design, but all are motivated by this one principle.

### Related Sections Include

Topic 9, DRY—The Evils of Duplication

Topic 10, Orthogonality

Topic 11, Reversibility

Topic 14, Domain Languages

Topic 28, Decoupling

Topic 30, Transforming Programming

Topic 31, Inheritance Tax

### Challenges

Think about a design principle you use regularly. Is it intended to make things easy-to-change?

Also think about languages and programming paradigms (OO, FP, Reactive, and so on). Do any have either big positives or big negatives when it comes to helping you write ETC code? Do any have both? When coding, what can you do to eliminate the negatives and [13] accentuate the positives?

Many editors have support (either built-in or via extensions) to run commands when you save a file. Get your editor to popup an ETC? [14] message every time you save and use it as a cue to think about the code you just wrote. Is it easy to change?
