## Topic 13. Prototypes and Post-it Notes

Many industries use prototypes to try out specific ideas; prototyping is much cheaper than full-scale production. Car makers, for example, may build many different prototypes of a new car design. Each one is designed to test a specific aspect of the car—the aerodynamics, styling, structural characteristics, and so on. Old school folks might use a clay model for wind tunnel testing, maybe a balsa wood and duct tape model will do for the art department, and so on. The less romantic will do their modeling on a computer screen or in virtual reality, reducing costs even further. In this way, risky or uncertain elements can be tried out without committing to building the real item.

We build software prototypes in the same fashion, and for the same reasons—to analyze and expose risk, and to offer chances for correction at a greatly reduced cost. Like the car makers, we can target a prototype to test one or more specific aspects of a project.

We tend to think of prototypes as code-based, but they don’t always have to be. Like the car makers, we can build prototypes out of different materials. Post-it notes are great for prototyping dynamic things such as workflow and application logic. A user interface can be prototyped as a drawing on a whiteboard, as a nonfunctional mock-up drawn with a paint program, or with an interface builder.

Prototypes are designed to answer just a few questions, so they are much cheaper and faster to develop than applications that go into production. The code can ignore unimportant details— unimportant to you at the moment, but probably very important to the user later on. If you are prototyping a UI, for instance, you can get away with incorrect results or data. On the other hand, if you’re just investigating computational or performance aspects, you can get away with a pretty poor UI, or perhaps even no UI at all.

But if you find yourself in an environment where you cannot give up the details, then you need to ask yourself if you are really building a prototype at all. Perhaps a tracer bullet style of development would be more appropriate in this case (see Topic 12, Tracer Bullets ).

### Things To Prototype

What sorts of things might you choose to investigate with a prototype? Anything that carries risk. Anything that hasn’t been tried before, or that is absolutely critical to the final system. Anything unproven, experimental, or doubtful. Anything you aren’t comfortable with. You can prototype:

Architecture

New functionality in an existing system

Structure or contents of external data

Third-party tools or components

Performance issues

User interface design

Prototyping is a learning experience. Its value lies not in the code produced, but in the lessons learned. That’s really the point of prototyping.

### Prototype to Learn

### How To Use Prototypes

When building a prototype, what details can you ignore?

Correctness You may be able to use dummy data where appropriate.

Completeness The prototype may function only in a very limited sense, perhaps with only one preselected piece of input data and one menu item.

Robustness Error checking is likely to be incomplete or missing entirely. If you stray from the predefined path, the prototype may crash and burn in a glorious display of pyrotechnics. That’s okay.

Style Prototype code shouldn’t have much in the way of comments or documentation (although you may produce reams of documentation as a result of your experience with the prototype).

Prototypes gloss over details, and focus in on specific aspects of the system being considered, so you may want to implement them using a high-level scripting language—higher than the rest

of the project (maybe a language such as Python or Ruby), as these languages can get out of your way. You may choose to continue to develop in the language used for the prototype, or you can switch; after all, you’re going to throw the prototype away anyway.

To prototype user interfaces, use a tool that lets you focus on the appearance and/or interactions without worrying about code or markup.

Scripting languages also work well as the “glue’’ to combine lowlevel pieces into new combinations. Using this approach, you can rapidly assemble existing components into new configurations to see how things work.

### Prototyping Architecture

Many prototypes are constructed to model the entire system under consideration. As opposed to tracer bullets, none of the individual modules in the prototype system need to be particularly functional. In fact, you may not even need to code in order to prototype architecture—you can prototype on a whiteboard, with Post-it notes or index cards. What you are looking for is how the system hangs together as a whole, again deferring details. Here are some specific areas you may want to look for in the architectural prototype:

Are the responsibilities of the major areas well defined and appropriate?

Are the collaborations between major components well defined?

Is coupling minimized?

Can you identify potential sources of duplication?

Are interface definitions and constraints acceptable?

Does every module have an access path to the data it needs during execution? Does it have that access when it needs it?

This last item tends to generate the most surprises and the most valuable results from the prototyping experience.

HOW NOT

### To Use Prototypes

Before you embark on any code-based prototyping, make sure that everyone understands that you are writing disposable code. Prototypes can be deceptively attractive to people who don’t know that they are just prototypes. You must make it very clear that this code is disposable, incomplete, and unable to be completed.

It’s easy to become misled by the apparent completeness of a demonstrated prototype, and project sponsors or management may insist on deploying the prototype (or its progeny) if you don’t set the right expectations. Remind them that you can build a great prototype of a new car out of balsa wood and duct tape, but you wouldn’t try to drive it in rush-hour traffic!

If you feel there is a strong possibility in your environment or culture that the purpose of prototype code may be misinterpreted, you may be better off with the tracer bullet approach. You’ll end up with a solid framework on which to base future development.

Properly used prototypes can save you huge amounts of time, money, and pain by identifying and correcting potential problem spots early in the development cycle—the time when fixing mistakes is both cheap and easy.

### Related Sections Include

Topic 12, Tracer Bullets

Topic 14, Domain Languages

Topic 17, Shell Games

Topic 27, Don’t Outrun Your Headlights

Topic 37, Listen to Your Lizard Brain

Topic 45, The Requirements Pit

Topic 52, Delight Your Users

### Exercises

Exercise 3 ( possible answer )

Marketing would like to sit down and brainstorm a few web page designs with you. They are thinking of clickable image maps to take you to other pages, and so on. But they can’t decide on a model for the image—maybe it’s a car, or a phone, or a house. You have a list of target pages and content; they’d like to see a few prototypes. Oh, by the way, you have 15 minutes. What tools might you use?

> The limits of language are the limits of one’s world. Ludwig Wittgenstein
