## Topic 14. Domain Languages

Computer languages influence how you think about a problem, and how you think about communicating. Every language comes with a list of features: buzzwords such as static versus dynamic typing, early versus late binding, functional versus OO, inheritance models, mixins, macros—all of which may suggest or obscure certain solutions. Designing a solution with C++ in mind will produce different results than a solution based on Haskell-style thinking, and vice versa. Conversely, and we think more importantly, the language of the problem domain may also suggest a programming solution.

We always try to write code using the vocabulary of the application domain (see Maintain a Glossary ). In some cases, Pragmatic Programmers can go to the next level and actually program using the vocabulary, syntax, and semantics—the language—of the domain.

### Program Close to the Problem Domain

### Some Real-World Domain Languages

Let’s look at a few examples where folks have done just that.

RSpec

[19] RSpec is a testing library for Ruby. It inspired versions for most other modern languages. A test in RSpec is intended to reflect the behavior you expect from your code.

describe BowlingScore do it "totals 12 if you score 3 four times" do score = BowlingScore.new 4.times { score.add_pins(3) } expect(score.total).to eq(12) end end

Cucumber

[20] Cucumber is programming-language neutral way of specifying tests. You run the tests using a version of Cucumber appropriate to the language you’re using. In order to support the natural-language like syntax, you also have to write specific matchers that recognize phrases and extract parameters for the tests.

Feature : Scoring

Background : Given an empty scorecard

Scenario : bowling a lot of 3s Given I throw a 3 And I throw a 3 And I throw a 3 And I throw a 3 Then the score should be 12 Cucumber tests were intended to be read by the customers of the software (although that happens fairly rarely in practice; the following aside considers why that might be).

Why Don't Many Business Users Read Cucumber Features?

One of the reasons that the classic gather requirements, design, code, ship approach doesn’t work is that it is anchored by the concept that we know what the requirements are. But we rarely do. Your business users will have a vague idea of what they want to achieve, but they neither know nor care about the details. That’s part of our value: we intuit intent and convert it to code.

So when you force a business person to sign off on a requirements document, or get them to agree to a set of Cucumber features, you’re doing the equivalent of getting them to check the spelling in an essay written in Sumerian. They’ll make some random changes to save face and sign it off to get you out of their office.

Give them code that runs, however, and they can play with it. That’s where their real needs will surface.

Phoenix Routes Many web frameworks have a routing facility, mapping incoming HTTP requests onto handler functions in the code. [21] Here’s an example from Phoenix.

scope "/" , HelloPhoenix do pipe_through :browser # Use the default browser stack

get "/" , PageController, :index resources "/users" , UserController end

This says that requests starting “/” will be run through a series of filters appropriate for browsers. A request to “/” itself will be handled by the function in the module. The index PageController implements the functions needed to manage a UsersController resource accessible via the url . /users

Ansible

[22] Ansible is a tool that configures software, typically on a bunch of remote servers. It does this by reading a specification that you provide, then doing whatever is needed on the servers to make them mirror that spec. The specification can be written in [23] YAML, a language that builds data structures from text

descriptions:

--- - name: install nginx apt: name=nginx state=latest

- name: ensure nginx is running (and enable it at boot) service: name=nginx state=started enabled=yes

- name: write the nginx config file template: src=templates/nginx.conf.j2 dest=/etc/nginx/nginx.conf notify: - restart nginx

This example ensures that the latest version of nginx is installed on my servers, that it is started by default, and that it uses a configuration file that you’ve provided.

### Characteristics Of Domain Languages

Let’s look at these examples more closely.

RSpec and the Phoenix router are written in their host languages (Ruby and Elixir). They employ some fairly devious code, including metaprogramming and macros, but ultimately they are compiled and run as regular code.

Cucumber tests and Ansible configurations are written in their own languages. A Cucumber test is converted into code to be run or into a datastructure, whereas Ansible specs are always converted into a data structure that is run by Ansible itself.

As a result, RSpec and the router code are embedded into the code you run: they are true extensions to your code’s vocabulary. Cucumber and Ansible are read by code and converted into some form the code can use.

We call RSpec and the router examples of internal domain languages, while Cucumber and Ansible use external languages.

### Trade-Offs Between Internal And External

### Languages

In general, an internal domain language can take advantage of the features of its host language: the domain language you create is more powerful, and that power comes for free. For example, you could use some Ruby code to create a bunch of RSpec tests automatically. In this case we can test scores where there are no spares or strikes:

describe BowlingScore do (0..4).each |pins| do (1..20).each do |throws| target = pins * throws

it "totals #{ target } if you score #{ pins } #{ throws } times" do score = BowlingScore.new throws.times { score.add_pins(pins) } expect(score.total).to eq(target) end end end end That’s 100 tests you just wrote. Take the rest of the day off.

The downside of internal domain languages is that you’re bound by the syntax and semantics of that language. Although some languages are remarkably flexible in this regards, you’re still forced to compromise between the language you want and the language you can implement.

Ultimately, whatever you come up with must still be valid syntax in your target language. Languages with macros (such as

Elixir, Clojure, and Crystal) gives you a little more flexibility, but ultimately syntax is syntax.

External languages have no such restrictions. As long as you can write a parser for the language, you’re good to go. Sometimes you can use someone else’s parser (as Ansible did by using YAML), but then you’re back to making a compromise.

Writing a parser probably means adding new libraries and possibly tools to your application. And writing a good parser is not a trivial job. But, if you’re feeling stout of heart, you could look at parser generators such as bison or ANTLR, and parsing frameworks such as the many PEG parsers out there.

Our suggestion is fairly simple: don’t spend more effort than you save. Writing a domain language adds some cost to your project, and you’ll need to be convinced that there are offsetting savings (potentially in the long term).

In general, use off-the-shelf external languages (such as YAML, JSON, or CSV) if you can. If not, look at internal languages. We’d recommend using external languages only in cases where your language will be written by the users of your application.

### An Internal Domain Language On The Cheap

Finally, there’s a cheat for creating internal domain languages if you don’t mind the host language syntax leaking through. Don’t do a bunch of metaprogramming. Instead, just write functions to do the work. In fact, this is pretty much what RSpec does:

describe BowlingScore do it "totals 12 if you score 3 four times" do score = BowlingScore.new 4.times { score.add_pins(3) }

expect(score.total).to eq(12) end end

In this code, , , , , and are just Ruby methods. describe it expect to eq There’s a little plumbing behind the scenes in terms of how objects are passed around, but it’s all just code. We’ll explore that a little in the exercises.

### Related Sections Include

Topic 8, The Essence of Good Design

Topic 13, Prototypes and Post-it Notes

Topic 32, Configuration

### Challenges

Could some of the requirements of your current project be expressed in a domain-specific language? Would it be possible to write a compiler or translator that could generate most of the code required?

If you decide to adopt mini-languages as a way of programming closer to the problem domain, you’re accepting that some effort will be required to implement them. Can you see ways in which the framework you develop for one project can be reused in others?

### Exercises

Exercise 4 ( possible answer )

We want to implement a mini-language to control a simple turtle-graphics system. The language consists of single-letter commands, some followed by a single number. For example, the following input would draw a rectangle:

P 2  # select pen 2 D    # pen down W 2  # draw west 2cm N 1  # then north 1 E 2  # then east 2 S 1  # then back south U    # pen up

Implement the code that parses this language. It should be designed so that it is simple to add new commands.

Exercise 5 ( possible answer )

In the previous exercise we implemented a parser for the drawing language—it was an external domain language. Now implement it again as an internal language. Don’t do anything clever: just write a function for each of the commands. You may have to change the names of the commands to lower case, and maybe to wrap them inside something to provide some context.

Exercise 6 ( possible answer )

Design a BNF grammar to parse a time specification. All of the following examples should be accepted:

4pm, 7:38pm, 23:42, 3:16, 3:16am Exercise 7 ( possible answer )

Implement a parser for the BNF grammar in the previous exercise using a PEG parser generator in the language of your choice. The output should be an integer containing the number of minutes past midnight.

Exercise 8 ( possible answer )

Implement the time parser using a scripting language and regular expressions.
