# The Basic Tools

Every maker starts their journey with a basic set of good-quality tools. A woodworker might need rules, gauges, a couple of saws, some good planes, fine chisels, drills and braces, mallets, and clamps. These tools will be lovingly chosen, will be built to last, will perform specific jobs with little overlap with other tools, and, perhaps most importantly, will feel right in the budding woodworker’s hands.

Then begins a process of learning and adaptation. Each tool will have its own personality and quirks, and will need its own special handling. Each must be sharpened in a unique way, or held just so. Over time, each will wear according to use, until the grip looks like a mold of the woodworker’s hands and the cutting surface aligns perfectly with the angle at which the tool is held. At this point, the tools become conduits from the maker’s brain to the finished product—they have become extensions of their hands. Over time, the woodworker will add new tools, such as biscuit cutters, laser-guided miter saws, dovetail jigs—all wonderful pieces of technology. But you can bet that they’ll be happiest with one of those original tools in hand, feeling the plane sing as it slides through the wood.

Tools amplify your talent. The better your tools, and the better

you know how to use them, the more productive you can be. Start with a basic set of generally applicable tools. As you gain experience, and as you come across special requirements, you’ll add to this basic set. Like the maker, expect to add to your toolbox regularly. Always be on the lookout for better ways of doing things. If you come across a situation where you feel your current tools can’t cut it, make a note to look for something different or more powerful that would have helped. Let need drive your acquisitions.

Many new programmers make the mistake of adopting a single power tool, such as a particular integrated development environment (IDE), and never leave its cozy interface. This really is a mistake. You need to be comfortable beyond the limits imposed by an IDE. The only way to do this is to keep the basic tool set sharp and ready to use.

In this chapter we’ll talk about investing in your own basic toolbox. As with any good discussion on tools, we’ll start (in Topic 16, The Power of Plain Text ) by looking at your raw materials, the stuff you’ll be shaping. From there we’ll move to the workbench, or in our case the computer. How can you use your computer to get the most out of the tools you use? We’ll discuss this in Topic 17, Shell Games . Now that we have material and a bench to work on, we’ll turn to the tool you’ll probably use more than any other, your editor. In Topic 18, Power Editing , we’ll suggest ways of making you more efficient.

To ensure that we never lose any of our precious work, we should always use a Topic 19, Version Control system—even for personal things such as recipes or notes. And, since Murphy was really an optimist after all, you can’t be a great programmer until you become highly skilled at Topic 20, Debugging .

You’ll need some glue to bind much of the magic together. We discuss some possibilities in Topic 21, Text Manipulation .

Finally, the palest ink is still better than the best memory. Keep track of your thoughts and your history, as we describe in Topic 22, Engineering Daybooks .

Spend time learning to use these tools, and at some point you’ll be surprised to discover your fingers moving over the keyboard, manipulating text without conscious thought. The tools will have become extensions of your hands.

## Topic 16. The Power of Plain Text

As Pragmatic Programmers, our base material isn’t wood or iron, it’s knowledge. We gather requirements as knowledge, and then express that knowledge in our designs, implementations, tests, and documents. And we believe that the best format for storing knowledge persistently is plain text . With plain text, we give ourselves the ability to manipulate knowledge, both manually and programmatically, using virtually every tool at our disposal.

The problem with most binary formats is that the context necessary to understand the data is separate from the data itself. You are artificially divorcing the data from its meaning. The data may as well be encrypted; it is absolutely meaningless without the application logic to parse it. With plain text, however, you can achieve a self-describing data stream that is independent of the application that created it.

### What Is Plain Text?

Plain text is made up of printable characters in a form that conveys information. It can be as simple as a shopping list:

* milk * lettuce * coffee

or as complex as the source of this book (yes, it’s in plain text, much to the chagrin of the publisher, who wanted us to use a word processor).

The information part is important. The following is not useful plain text:

hlj;uijn bfjxrrctvh jkni'pio6p7gu;vh bjxrdi5rgvhj

Neither is this:

Field19=467abe

The reader has no idea what the significance of may be. 467abe We like our plain text to be understandable to humans.

### Keep Knowledge in Plain Text

### The Power Of Text

Plain text doesn’t mean that the text is unstructured; HTML, JSON, YAML, and so on are all plain text. So are the majority of the fundamental protocols on the net, such as HTTP, SMTP, IMAP, and so on. And that’s for some good reasons:

Insurance against obsolescence

Leverage existing tools

Easier testing

Insurance Against Obsolescence Human-readable forms of data, and self-describing data, will outlive all other forms of data and the applications that created them. Period. As long as the data survives, you will have a chance to be able to use it—potentially long after the original application that wrote it is defunct.

You can parse such a file with only partial knowledge of its

format; with most binary files, you must know all the details of the entire format in order to parse it successfully.

Consider a data file from some legacy system that you are given. [24] You know little about the original application; all that’s important to you is that it maintained a list of clients’ Social Security numbers, which you need to find and extract. Among the data, you see

<FIELD10>123-45-6789</FIELD10> ... <FIELD10>567-89-0123</FIELD10> ... <FIELD10>901-23-4567</FIELD10>

Recognizing the format of a Social Security number, you can quickly write a small program to extract that data—even if you have no information on anything else in the file.

But imagine if the file had been formatted this way instead:

AC27123456789B11P ... XY43567890123QTYL ... 6T2190123456788AM

You may not have recognized the significance of the numbers quite as easily. This is the difference between human readable and human understandable .

While we’re at it, doesn’t help much either. Something FIELD10 like

<SOCIAL-SECURITY-NO>123-45-6789</SOCIAL-SECURITY-NO>

makes the exercise a no-brainer—and ensures that the data will

outlive any project that created it.

Leverage Virtually every tool in the computing universe, from version control systems to editors to command-line tools, can operate on plain text.

The Unix Philosophy

Unix is famous for being designed around the philosophy of small, sharp tools, each intended to do one thing well. This philosophy is enabled by using a common underlying format—the line-oriented, plain-text file. Databases used for system administration (users and passwords, networking configuration, and so on) are all kept as plain-text files. (Some systems also maintain a binary form of certain databases as a performance optimization. The plain-text version is kept as an interface to the binary version.)

When a system crashes, you may be faced with only a minimal environment to restore it (you may not be able to access graphics drivers, for instance). Situations such as this can really make you appreciate the simplicity of plain text.

Plain text is also easier to search. If you can’t remember which configuration file manages your system backups, a quick grep -r backup /etc should tell you.

For instance, suppose you have a production deployment of a large application with a complex site-specific configuration file. If this file is in plain text, you could place it under a version control system (see Topic 19, Version Control ), so that you automatically keep a history of all changes. File comparison tools such as and allow you to see at a glance what changes diff fc have been made, while allows you to generate a checksum to sum monitor the file for accidental (or malicious) modification.

Easier Testing If you use plain text to create synthetic data to drive system tests, then it is a simple matter to add, update, or modify the test data without having to create any special tools to do so.

Similarly, plain-text output from regression tests can be trivially analyzed with shell commands or a simple script.

### Lowest Common Denominator

Even in the future of blockchain-based intelligent agents that travel the wild and dangerous internet autonomously, negotiating data interchange among themselves, the ubiquitous text file will still be there. In fact, in heterogeneous environments the advantages of plain text can outweigh all of the drawbacks. You need to ensure that all parties can communicate using a common standard. Plain text is that standard.

### Related Sections Include

Topic 17, Shell Games

Topic 21, Text Manipulation

Topic 32, Configuration

### Challenges

Design a small address book database (name, phone number, and so on) using a straightforward binary representation in your language of choice. Do this before reading the rest of this challenge.

Translate that format into a plain-text format using XML or JSON.

For each version, add a new, variable-length field called directions in which you might enter directions to each person’s house.

What issues come up regarding versioning and extensibility? Which

form was easier to modify? What about converting existing data?
