## Topic 21. Text Manipulation

Pragmatic Programmers manipulate text the same way woodworkers shape wood. In previous sections we discussed some specific tools—shells, editors, debuggers—that we use. These are similar to a woodworker’s chisels, saws, and planes— tools specialized to do one or two jobs well. However, every now and then we need to perform some transformation not readily handled by the basic tool set. We need a general-purpose text manipulation tool.

Text manipulation languages are to programming what [28] routers are to woodworking. They are noisy, messy, and somewhat brute force. Make mistakes with them, and entire pieces can be ruined. Some people swear they have no place in the toolbox. But in the right hands, both routers and text manipulation languages can be incredibly powerful and versatile. You can quickly trim something into shape, make joints, and carve. Used properly, these tools have surprising finesse and subtlety. But they take time to master.

Fortunately, there are a number of great text manipulation languages. Unix developers (and we include macOS users here) often like to use the power of their command shells, augmented with tools such as and . People who prefer a more awk sed structured tool may prefer languages such as Python or Ruby.

These languages are important enabling technologies. Using them, you can quickly hack up utilities and prototype ideas—

jobs that might take five or ten times as long using conventional languages. And that multiplying factor is crucially important to the kind of experimenting that we do. Spending 30 minutes trying out a crazy idea is a whole lot better than spending five hours. Spending a day automating important components of a project is acceptable; spending a week might not be. In their book The Practice of Programming [KP99] , Kernighan and Pike built the same program in five different languages. The Perl version was the shortest (17 lines, compared with C’s 150). With Perl you can manipulate text, interact with programs, talk over networks, drive web pages, perform arbitrary precision arithmetic, and write programs that look like Snoopy swearing.

### Learn a Text Manipulation Language

To show the wide-ranging applicability of text manipulation languages, here’s a sample of some stuff we’ve done with Ruby and Python just related to the creation of this book:

Building the Book The build system for the Pragmatic Bookshelf is written in Ruby. Authors, editors, layout people, and support folks use Rake tasks to coordinate the building of PDFs and ebooks.

Code inclusion and highlighting We think it is important that any code presented in a book should have been tested first. Most of the code in this book has been. However, using the DRY principle (see Topic 9, DRY—The Evils of Duplication ) we didn’t want to copy and paste lines of code from the tested programs into the book. That would mean we’d be

duplicating code, virtually guaranteeing that we’d forget to update an example when the corresponding program was changed. For some examples, we also didn’t want to bore you with all the framework code needed to make our example compile and run. We turned to Ruby. A relatively simple script is invoked when we format the book—it extracts a named segment of a source file, does syntax highlighting, and converts the result into the typesetting language we use.

Website update We have a simple script that does a partial book build, extracts the table of contents, then uploads it to the book’s page on our website. We also have a script that extracts sections of a book and uploads them as samples.

Including equations There’s a Python script that converts LaTeX math markup into nicely formatted text.

Index generation Most indexes are created as separate documents (which makes maintaining them difficult if a document changes). Ours are marked up in the text itself, and a Ruby script collates and formats the entries.

And so on. In a very real way, the Pragmatic Bookshelf is built around text manipulation. And if you follow our advice to keep things in plain text, then using these languages to manipulate that text will bring a whole host of benefits.

### Related Sections Include

Topic 16, The Power of Plain Text

Topic 17, Shell Games

### Exercises

Exercise 11

You’re rewriting an application that used to use YAML as a configuration language. Your company has now standardized on JSON, so you have a bunch of files that need to be turned .yaml into . Write a script that takes a directory and converts each .json file into a corresponding file (so becomes .yaml .json database.yaml , and the contents are valid JSON). database.json

Exercise 12

Your team initially chose to use names for variables, camelCase but then changed their collective mind and switched to . Write a script that scans all the source files for snake_case camelCase names and reports on them.

Exercise 13

Following on from the previous exercise, add the ability to change those variable names automatically in one or more files. Remember to keep a backup of the originals in case something goes horribly, horribly wrong.
