## Topic 22. Engineering Daybooks

Dave once worked for a small computer manufacturer, which meant working alongside electronic and sometimes mechanical engineers.

Many of them walked around with a paper notebook, normally with a pen stuffed down the spine. Every now and then when we were talking, they’d pop the notebook open and scribble something.

Eventually Dave asked the obvious question. It turned out that they’d been trained to keep an engineering daybook , a kind of journal in which they recorded what they did, things they’d learned, sketches of ideas, readings from meters: basically anything to do with their work. When the notebook became full, they’d write the date range on the spine, then stick it on the shelf next to previous daybooks. There may have been a gentle competition going on for whose set of books took the most shelf space.

We use daybooks to take notes in meetings, to jot down what we’re working on, to note variable values when debugging, to leave reminders where we put things, to record wild ideas, and [29] sometimes just to doodle.

The daybook has three main benefits:

It is more reliable than memory. People might ask “What was the name of that company you called last week about the power supply

problem?” and you can flip back a page or so and give them the name and number.

It gives you a place to store ideas that aren’t immediately relevant to the task at hand. That way you can continue to concentrate on what you are doing, knowing that the great idea won’t be forgotten.

It acts as a kind of rubber duck (described here ). When you stop to write something down, your brain may switch gears, almost as if talking to someone—a great chance to reflect. You may start to make a note and then suddenly realize that what you’d just done, the topic of the note, is just plain wrong.

There’s an added benefit, too. Every now and then you can look back at what you were doing oh-so-many-years-ago and think about the people, the projects, and the awful clothes and hairstyles.

So, try keeping an engineering daybook. Use paper, not a file or a wiki: there’s something special about the act of writing compared to typing. Give it a month, and see if you’re getting any benefits.

If nothing else, it’ll make writing your memoir easier when you’re rich and famous.

### Related Sections Include

Topic 6, Your Knowledge Portfolio

Topic 37, Listen to Your Lizard Brain

Footnotes

[24] All software becomes legacy software as soon as it’s written.

[25] Although the Elm language does have a time-traveling debugger.

Why “rubber ducking’’? While an undergraduate at Imperial College in London, Dave [26] did a lot of work with a research assistant named Greg Pugh, one of the best developers Dave has known. For several months Greg carried around a small yellow rubber duck, which he’d place on his terminal while coding. It was a while before Dave had the courage to ask….

[27] Earlier versions of the book talked about talking to your pot plant . It was a typo. Honest.

[28] Here router means the tool that spins cutting blades very, very fast, not a device for interconnecting networks.

[29] There is some evidence that doodling helps focus and improves cognitive skills, for example, see What does doodling do? [And10] .

Copyright © 2020 Pearson Education, Inc.
