## Topic 24. Dead Programs Tell No Lies

Have you noticed that sometimes other people can detect that things aren’t well with you before you’re aware of the problem yourself? It’s the same with other people’s code. If something is starting to go awry with one of our programs, sometimes it is a library or framework routine that catches it first. Maybe we’ve passed in a value, or an empty list. Maybe there’s a missing nil key in that hash, or the value we thought contained a hash really contains a list instead. Maybe there was a network error or filesystem error that we didn’t catch, and we’ve got empty or corrupted data. A logic error a couple of million instructions ago means that the selector for a case statement is no longer the expected 1, 2, or 3. We’ll hit the case unexpectedly. That’s default also one reason why each and every case/switch statement needs to have a default clause: we want to know when the “impossible” has happened.

It’s easy to fall into the “it can’t happen” mentality. Most of us have written code that didn’t check that a file closed successfully, or that a trace statement got written as we expected. And all things being equal, it’s likely that we didn’t need to—the code in question wouldn’t fail under any normal conditions. But we’re coding defensively. We’re making sure that the data is what we think it is, that the code in production is the code we think it is. We’re checking that the correct versions of dependencies were actually loaded.

All errors give you information. You could convince yourself

that the error can’t happen, and choose to ignore it. Instead, Pragmatic Programmers tell themselves that if there is an error, something very, very bad has happened. Don’t forget to Read the Damn Error Message (see Coder in a Strange Land ).

### Catch And Release Is For Fish

Some developers feel that is it good style to catch or rescue all exceptions, re-raising them after writing some kind of message. Their code is full of things like this (where a bare statement raise reraises the current exception):

try do add_score_to_board(score); InvalidScore rescue Logger.error( "Can't add invalid score. Exiting" ); raise rescue BoardServerDown Logger.error( "Can't add score: board is down. Exiting" ); raise StaleTransaction rescue Logger.error( "Can't add score: stale transaction. Exiting" ); raise end

Here’s how Pragmatic Programmers would write this:

add_score_to_board(score);

We prefer it for two reasons. First, the application code isn’t eclipsed by the error handling. Second, and perhaps more important, the code is less coupled. In the verbose example, we have to list every exception the method could add_score_to_board raise. If the writer of that method adds another exception, our code is subtly out of date. In the more pragmatic second version, the new exception is automatically propagated.

**Tip 38: Crash Early**

### Crash, Don’T Trash

One of the benefits of detecting problems as soon as you can is that you can crash earlier, and crashing is often the best thing you can do. The alternative may be to continue, writing corrupted data to some vital database or commanding the washing machine into its twentieth consecutive spin cycle.

The Erlang and Elixir languages embrace this philosophy. Joe Armstrong, inventor of Erlang and author of Programming Erlang: Software for a Concurrent World [Arm07] , is often quoted as saying, “Defensive programming is a waste of time. Let it crash!” In these environments, programs are designed to fail, but that failure is managed with supervisors . A supervisor is responsible for running code and knows what to do in case the code fails, which could include cleaning up after it, restarting it, and so on. What happens when the supervisor itself fails? Its own supervisor manages that event, leading to a design composed of supervisor trees. The technique is very effective and helps to account for the use of these languages in high-availability, fault-tolerant systems.

In other environments, it may be inappropriate simply to exit a running program. You may have claimed resources that might not get released, or you may need to write log messages, tidy up open transactions, or interact with other processes.

However, the basic principle stays the same—when your code discovers that something that was supposed to be impossible just happened, your program is no longer viable. Anything it does from this point forward becomes suspect, so terminate it

as soon as possible.

A dead program normally does a lot less damage than a crippled one.

### Related Sections Include

Topic 20, Debugging

Topic 23, Design by Contract

Topic 25, Assertive Programming

Topic 26, How to Balance Resources

Topic 43, Stay Safe Out There

> There is a luxury in self-reproach. When we blame ourselves we feel no one else has a right to blame us. Oscar Wilde, The Picture of Dorian Gray
