## Topic 25. Assertive Programming

It seems that there’s a mantra that every programmer must memorize early in his or her career. It is a fundamental tenet of computing, a core belief that we learn to apply to requirements, designs, code, comments, just about everything we do. It goes

This can never happen…

“This application will never be used abroad, so why internationalize it?” “ can’t be count negative.” “Logging can’t fail.”

Let’s not practice this kind of self-deception, particularly when coding.

### Use Assertions to Prevent the Impossible

Whenever you find yourself thinking “but of course that could never happen,” add code to check it. The easiest way to do this is with assertions. In many language implementations, you’ll find [31] some form of that checks a Boolean condition. These assert checks can be invaluable. If a parameter or a result should never be , then check for it explicitly: null

assert (result != null );

In the Java implementation, you can (and should) add a descriptive string:

result != && result.size() > 0 : "Empty result from XYZ" ; assert null Assertions are also useful checks on an algorithm’s operation. Maybe you’ve written a clever sort algorithm, named . my_sort Check that it works:

books = my_sort(find( "scifi" )) assert(is_sorted?(books))

Don’t use assertions in place of real error handling. Assertions check for things that should never happen: you don’t want to be writing code such as the following:

puts( "Enter 'Y' or 'N': " ) ans = gets[0] # Grab first character of response assert((ch == 'Y' ) || (ch == 'N' )) # Very bad idea!

And just because most implementations will terminate the assert process when an assertion fails, there’s no reason why versions you write should. If you need to free resources, catch the assertion’s exception or trap the exit, and run your own error handler. Just make sure the code you execute in those dying milliseconds doesn’t rely on the information that triggered the assertion failure in the first place.

### Assertions And Side Effects

It’s embarrassing when the code we add to detect errors actually ends up creating new errors. This can happen with assertions if evaluating the condition has side effects. For example, it would be a bad idea to code something such as

while (iter.hasMoreElements()) { assert (iter.nextElement() != null ); Object obj = iter.nextElement(); // .... }

The call in the assertion has the side effect of .nextElement() moving the iterator past the element being fetched, and so the loop will process only half the elements in the collection. It would be better to write

(iter.hasMoreElements()) { while Object obj = iter.nextElement(); (obj != ); assert null // .... }

[32] This problem is a kind of Heisenbug —debugging that changes the behavior of the system being debugged.

(We also believe that nowadays, when most languages have decent support for iterating functions over collections, this kind of explicit loop is unnecessary and bad form.)

### Leave Assertions Turned On

There is a common misunderstanding about assertions. It goes something like this:

Assertions add some overhead to code. Because they check for things that should never happen, they’ll get triggered only by a bug in the code. Once the code has been tested and shipped, they are no longer needed, and should be turned off to make the code run faster. Assertions are a debugging facility.

There are two patently wrong assumptions here. First, they assume that testing finds all the bugs. In reality, for any

complex program you are unlikely to test even a minuscule percentage of the permutations your code will be put through. Second, the optimists are forgetting that your program runs in a dangerous world. During testing, rats probably won’t gnaw through a communications cable, someone playing a game won’t exhaust memory, and log files won’t fill the storage partition. These things might happen when your program runs in a production environment. Your first line of defense is checking for any possible error, and your second is using assertions to try to detect those you’ve missed.

Turning off assertions when you deliver a program to production is like crossing a high wire without a net because you once made it across in practice. There’s dramatic value, but it’s hard to get life insurance.

Even if you do have performance issues, turn off only those assertions that really hit you. The sort example above may be a critical part of your application, and may need to be fast. Adding the check means another pass through the data, which might be unacceptable. Make that particular check optional, but leave the rest in.

Use Assertions in Production, Win Big Money

A former neighbor of Andy’s headed up a small startup company that made network devices. One of their secrets to success was the decision to leave assertions in place in production releases. These assertions were well crafted to report all the pertinent data leading to the failure, and presented via a nice-looking UI to the end user. This level of feedback, from real users under actual conditions, allowed the developers to plug the holes and fix these obscure, hard-to-reproduce bugs, resulting in remarkably stable, bullet-proof software.

This small, unknown company had such a solid product, it was soon acquired for hundreds of millions of dollars.

Just sayin’.

Exercise 16 ( possible answer )

A quick reality check. Which of these “impossible” things can happen?

A month with fewer than 28 days

Error code from a system call: can’t access the current directory

In C++: but does not equal a = 2; b = 3; (a + b)

A triangle with an interior angle sum 180° ≠

A minute that doesn’t have 60 seconds

(a + 1) <= a

### Related Sections Include

Topic 23, Design by Contract

Topic 24, Dead Programs Tell No Lies

Topic 42, Property-Based Testing

Topic 43, Stay Safe Out There

> To light a candle is to cast a shadow... Ursula K. Le Guin, A Wizard of Earthsea
