## Topic 30. Transforming Programming

All programs transform data, converting an input into an output. And yet when we think about design, we rarely think about creating transformations. Instead we worry about classes and modules, data structures and algorithms, languages and frameworks.

We think that this focus on code often misses the point: we need to get back to thinking of programs as being something that transforms inputs into outputs. When we do, many of the details we previously worried about just evaporate. The structure becomes clearer, the error handling more consistent, and the coupling drops way down.

To start our investigation, let’s take the time machine back to the 1970s and ask a Unix programmer to write us a program that lists the five longest files in a directory tree, where longest means “having the largest number of lines.”

You might expect them to reach for an editor and start typing in C. But they wouldn’t, because they are thinking about this in terms of what we have (a directory tree) and what we want (a list of files). Then they’d go to a terminal and type something like:

$ find . -type f | xargs wc -l | sort -n | tail -5

This is a series of transformations:

find . -type f Write a list of all the files ( ) in or below the current -type f directory ( ) to standard output. .

xargs wc -l Read lines from standard input and arrange for them all to be passed as arguments to the command . The wc -l wc program with the option counts the number of lines in -l each of its arguments and writes each result as “count filename” to standard output.

sort -n Sort standard input assuming each line starts with a number ( ), writing the result to standard output. -n

tail -5 Read standard input and write just the last five lines to standard output.

Run this in our book’s directory and we get

470 ./test_to_build.pml 487 ./dbc.pml 719 ./domain_languages.pml 727 ./dry.pml 9561 total

That last line is the total number of lines in all the files (not just those shown), because that’s what does. We can strip it off by wc requesting one more line from , and then ignoring the last tail line:

$ find . -type f | xargs wc -l | sort -n | tail -6 | head -5 470 ./debug.pml 470 ./test_to_build.pml 487 ./dbc.pml 719 ./domain_languages.pml 727 ./dry.pml

images/wc-pipeline.png

Figure 1. The pipeline as a series of find transformations

Let’s look at this in terms of the data that flows between the individual steps. Our original requirement, “top 5 files in terms of lines,” becomes a series of transformations (also show in the figure ).

directory name list of files → list with line numbers → sorted list → highest five + total → highest five →

It’s almost like an industrial assembly line: feed raw data in one

end and the finished product (information) comes out the other.

And we like to think about all code this way.

### Programming Is About Code, But Programs Are

**Tip 49: About Data**

### Finding Transformations

Sometimes the easiest way to find the transformations is to start with the requirement and determine its inputs and outputs. Now you’ve defined the function representing the overall program. You can then find steps that lead you from input to output. This is a top-down approach.

For example, you want to create a website for folks playing word games that finds all the words that can be made from a set of letters. Your input here is a set of letters, and your output is a list of three-letter words, four-letter words, and so on:

is transformed to "lvyin" → 3 => ivy, lin, nil, yin

4 => inly, liny, viny

5 => vinyl

(Yes, they are all words, at least according to the macOS dictionary.)

The trick behind the overall application is simple: we have a dictionary which groups words by a signature, chosen so that all

words containing the same letters will have the same signature. The simplest signature function is just the sorted list of letters in the word. We can then look up an input string by generating a signature for it, and then seeing which words (if any) in the dictionary have that same signature.

Thus the anagram finder breaks down into four separate transformations:

Ste Transformation Sample data p

Step Initial input "ylvin" 0:

Step All combinations of three or more letters 1: vin, viy, vil, vny, vnl, vyl, iny, inl, iyl, nyl, viny, vinl, viyl, vnyl, inyl, vinyl

Step Signatures of the combinations 2: inv, ivy, ilv, nvy, lnv, lvy, iny, iln, ily, lny, invy, ilnv, ilvy, lnvy, ilny, ilnvy

Step 3: List of all dictionary words which match ivy, yin, nil, lin, viny, liny, inly, any of the vinyl signatures

Step Words grouped by length 4: 3 => ivy, lin, nil, yin

4 => inly, liny, viny

5 => vinyl

Transformations All the Way Down

Let’s start by looking at step 1, which takes a word and creates a list of all combinations of three or more letters. This step can itself be expressed as a list of transformations:

Step Transformation Sample data

Step 1.0: Initial input "vinyl"

Step 1.1: Convert to characters v, i, n, y, l

Step 1.2: Get all subsets

[], [v], [i], … [v,i], [v,n], [v,y], … [v,i,n], [v,i,y], … [v,n,y,l], [i,n,y,l], [v,i,n,y,l]

Step 1.3: Only those longer than three characters [v,i,n], [v,i,y], … [i,n,y,l], [v,i,n,y,l]

Step 1.4: Convert back to strings [vin,viy, … inyl,vinyl]

We’ve now reached the point where we can easily implement each transformation in code (using Elixir in this case):

function-pipelines/anagrams/lib/anagrams.ex

defp all_subsets_longer_than_three_characters(word) do word |> String.codepoints() |> Comb.subsets() |> Stream.filter( fn subset -> length(subset) >= 3 end ) |> Stream.map(&List.to_string(&1)) end

What’s with the |> Operator? Elixir, along with many other functional languages, has a pipeline operator, sometimes called a forward pipe or just a [41] pipe . All it does is take the value on its left and insert it as the first parameter of the function on its right, so

"vinyl" |> String.codepoints |> Comb.subsets()

is the same as writing

Comb.subsets(String.codepoints( "vinyl" ))

(Other languages may inject this piped value as the last parameter of the next function—it largely depends on the style of the built-in libraries.)

You might think that this is just syntactic sugar. But in a very real way the pipeline operator is a revolutionary opportunity to think differently. Using a pipeline means that you’re automatically thinking in terms of transforming data; each time you see you’re actually seeing a place where data is flowing |> between one transformation and the next.

Many languages have something similar: Elm, F#, and Swift have , Clojure has and (which work a little differently), R |> -> ->> has . Haskell both has pipe operators and makes it easy to %>% declare new ones. As we write this, there’s talk of adding to |> JavaScript.

If your current language supports something similar, you’re in luck. If it doesn’t, see Language X Doesn’t Have Pipelines .

Anyway, back to the code.

Keep on Transforming… Now look at Step 2 of the main program, where we convert the subsets into signatures. Again, it’s a simple transformation—a list of subsets becomes a list of signatures:

Step Transformation Sample data

Step 2.0: initial input vin, viy, … inyl, vinyl

Step 2.1: convert to signatures inv, ivy … ilny, inlvy

The Elixir code in the following listing is just as simple:

function-pipelines/anagrams/lib/anagrams.ex

defp as_unique_signatures(subsets) do subsets |> Stream.map(&Dictionary.signature_of/1) end

Now we transform that list of signatures: each signature gets mapped to the list of known words with the same signature, or if there are no such words. We then have to remove the nil nils and flatten the nested lists into a single level:

function-pipelines/anagrams/lib/anagrams.ex

find_in_dictionary(signatures) defp do signatures |> Stream.map(&Dictionary.lookup_by_signature/1)

|> Stream.reject(&is_nil/1) |> Stream.concat(&(&1)) end

Step 4, grouping the words by length, is another simple transformation, converting our list into a map where the keys are the lengths, and the values are all words with that length:

function-pipelines/anagrams/lib/anagrams.ex

defp group_by_length(words) do words |> Enum.sort() |> Enum.group_by(&String.length/1) end

Language X Doesn't Have Pipelines

Pipelines have been around for a long time, but only in niche languages. They’ve only moved into the mainstream recently, and many popular languages still don’t support the concept.

The good news is that thinking in transformations doesn’t require a particular language syntax: it’s more a philosophy of design. You still construct your code as transformations, but you write them as a series of assignments:

const content = File.read(file_name);

const lines   = find_matching_lines(content, pattern)

const result  = truncate_lines(lines)

It’s a little more tedious, but it gets the job done.

Putting It All Together We’ve written each of the individual transformations. Now it’s time to string them all together into our main function:

function-pipelines/anagrams/lib/anagrams.ex

def anagrams_in(word) do

word |> all_subsets_longer_than_three_characters() |> as_unique_signatures() |> find_in_dictionary() |> group_by_length() end

Does it work? Let’s try it:

iex(1)> Anagrams.anagrams_in "lyvin" %{ 3 => ["ivy", "lin", "nil", "yin"], 4 => ["inly", "liny", "viny"], 5 => ["vinyl"] }

### Why Is This So Great?

Let’s look at the body of the main function again:

word |> all_subsets_longer_than_three_characters() |> as_unique_signatures() |> find_in_dictionary() |> group_by_length()

It’s simply a chain of the transformations needed to meet our requirement, each taking input from the previous transformation and passing output to the next. That comes about as close to literate code as you can get.

But there’s something deeper, too. If your background is objectoriented programming, then your reflexes demand that you hide data, encapsulating it inside objects. These objects then chatter back and forth, changing each other’s state. This introduces a lot of coupling, and it is a big reason that OO systems can be hard to change.

**Tip 50: Don’t Hoard State; Pass It Around**

In the transformational model, we turn that on its head. Instead of little pools of data spread all over the system, think of data as a mighty river, a flow . Data becomes a peer to functionality: a pipeline is a sequence of code data code data…. The → → → data is no longer tied to a particular group of functions, as it is in a class definition. Instead it is free to represent the unfolding progress of our application as it transforms its inputs into its outputs. This means that we can greatly reduce coupling: a function can be used (and reused) anywhere its parameters match the output of some other function.

Yes, there is still a degree of coupling, but in our experience it’s more manageable than the OO-style of command and control. And, if you’re using a language with type checking, you’ll get compile-time warnings when you try to connect two incompatible things.

### What About Error Handling?

So far our transforms have worked in a world where nothing goes wrong. How can we use them in the real world, though? If we can only build linear chains, how can we add all that conditional logic that we need for error checking?

There are many ways of doing this, but they all rely on a basic convention: we never pass raw values between transformations. Instead, we wrap them in a data structure (or type) which also tells us if the contained value is valid. In Haskell, for example, this wrapper is called . In F# and Scala it’s . Maybe Option

How you use this concept is language specific. In general, though, there are two basic ways of writing the code: you can

handle checking for errors inside your transformations or outside them.

Elixir, which we’ve used so far, doesn’t have this support built in. For our purposes this is a good thing, as we get to show an implementation from the ground up. Something similar should work in most other languages.

First, Choose a Representation We need a representation for our wrapper (the data structure that carries around a value or an error indication). You can use structures for this, but Elixir already has a pretty strong convention: functions tend to return a tuple containing either or . For example, returns either {:ok, value} {:error, reason} File.open :ok and an IO process or and a reason code: :error

iex(1)> File.open( "/etc/passwd" ) {:ok, #PID<0.109.0>} iex(2)> File.open( "/etc/wombat" ) {:error, :enoent}

We’ll use the / tuple as our wrapper when passing things :ok :error through a pipeline.

Then Handle It Inside Each Transformation Let’s write a function that returns all the lines in a file that contain a given string, truncated to the first 20 characters. We want to write it as a transformation, so the input will be a file name and a string to match, and the output will be either an :ok tuple with a list of lines or an tuple with some kind of :error reason. The top-level function should look something like this:

function-pipelines/anagrams/lib/grep.ex

def find_all(file_name, pattern) do

File.read(file_name) |> find_matching_lines(pattern) |> truncate_lines() end

There’s no explicit error checking here, but if any step in the pipeline returns an error tuple then the pipeline will return that [42] error without executing the functions that follow. We do this using Elixir’s pattern matching:

function-pipelines/anagrams/lib/grep.ex

defp find_matching_lines({ :ok , content}, pattern) do content |> String.split( ~r/\n/ ) |> Enum.filter(&String.match?(&1, pattern)) |> ok_unless_empty() end

defp find_matching_lines(error, _), do : error

```
# ----------
```

truncate_lines({ :ok , lines }) defp do lines |> Enum.map(&String.slice(&1, 0, 20)) |> ok() end

truncate_lines(error), : error defp do

```
# ----------
```

defp ok_unless_empty([]), do : error( "nothing found" ) ok_unless_empty(result), : ok(result) defp do

defp ok(result), do : { :ok ,    result } error(reason), : { :error , reason } defp do Have a look at the function . If its first find_matching_lines parameter is an tuple, it uses the content in that tuple to find :ok

lines matching the pattern. However, if the first parameter is not an tuple, the second version of the function runs, which :ok just returns that parameter. This way the function simply forwards an error down the pipeline. The same thing applies to . truncate_lines

We can play with this at the console:

iex> Grep.find_all "/etc/passwd" , ~r/www/ {:ok, ["_www: :70:70:World W", "_wwwproxy: :252:252:"]} * *

iex> Grep.find_all "/etc/passwd" , ~r/wombat/ {:error, "nothing found"} iex> Grep.find_all "/etc/koala" , ~r/www/ {:error, :enoent}

You can see that an error anywhere in the pipeline immediately becomes the value of the pipeline.

Or Handle It in the Pipeline You might be looking at the and find_matching_lines truncate_lines functions thinking that we’ve moved the burden of error handling into the transformations. You’d be right. In a language which uses pattern matching in function calls, such as Elixir, the effect is lessened, but it’s still ugly.

It would be nice if Elixir had a version of the pipeline operator |> that knew about the / tuples and which short-circuited :ok :error [43] execution when an error occurred. But the fact that it doesn’t allows us to add something similar, and in a way that is applicable to a number of other languages.

The problem we face is that when an error occurs we don’t want to run code further down the pipeline, and that we don’t want that code to know that this is happening. This means that we

need to defer running pipeline functions until we know that previous steps in the pipeline were successful. To do this, we’ll need to change them from function calls into function values that can be called later. Here’s one implementation:

function-pipelines/anagrams/lib/grep1.ex

Grep1 defmodule do

def and_then({ :ok , value }, func), do : func.(value) and_then(anything_else, _func), : anything_else def do

find_all(file_name, pattern) def do File.read(file_name) |> and_then(&find_matching_lines(&1, pattern)) |> and_then(&truncate_lines(&1)) end

defp find_matching_lines(content, pattern) do content |> String.split( ~r/\n/ ) |> Enum.filter(&String.match?(&1, pattern)) |> ok_unless_empty() end

truncate_lines(lines) defp do lines |> Enum.map(&String.slice(&1, 0, 20)) |> ok() end

ok_unless_empty([]), : error( "nothing found" ) defp do defp ok_unless_empty(result), do : ok(result)

ok(result), : { :ok , result } defp do defp error(reason), do : { :error , reason } end The function is an example of a bind function: it takes a and_then value wrapped in something, then applies a function to that

value, returning a new wrapped value. Using the and_then function in the pipeline takes a little extra punctuation because Elixir needs to be told to convert function calls into function values, but that extra effort is offset by the fact that the transforming functions become simple: each just takes a value (and any extra parameters) and returns or {:ok, new_value} {:error, . reason}

### Transformations Transform Programming

Thinking of code as a series of (nested) transformations can be a liberating approach to programming. It takes a while to get used to, but once you’ve developed the habit you’ll find your code becomes cleaner, your functions shorter, and your designs flatter.

Give it a try.

### Related Sections Include

Topic 8, The Essence of Good Design

Topic 17, Shell Games

Topic 26, How to Balance Resources

Topic 28, Decoupling

Topic 35, Actors and Processes

### Exercises

Exercise 21 ( possible answer )

Can you express the following requirements as a top-level transformation? That is, for each, identify the input and the output.

1.  Shipping and sales tax are added to an order 2.  Your application loads configuration information from a named file 3.  Someone logs in to a web application

Exercise 22 ( possible answer )

You’ve identified the need to validate and convert an input field from a string into an integer between 18 and 150. The overall transformation is described by

field contents as string → [validate & convert] → {:ok, value} | {:error, reason}

Write the individual transformations that make up validate & convert .

Exercise 23 ( possible answer )

In Language X Doesn’t Have Pipelines we wrote:

const content = File.read(file_name); const lines   = find_matching_lines(content, pattern) const result  = truncate_lines(lines)

Many people write OO code by chaining together method calls, and might be tempted to write this as something like:

const result = content_of(file_name) .find_matching_lines(pattern) .truncate_lines()

What’s the difference between these two pieces of code? Which do you think we prefer?

> You wanted a banana but what you got was a gorilla holding the banana and the entire jungle. Joe Armstrong
