## Topic 31. Inheritance Tax

Do you program in an objectoriented language? Do you use inheritance?

If so, stop! It probably isn’t what you want to do.

Let’s see why.

### Some Background

Inheritance first appeared in Simula 67 in 1969. It was an elegant solution to the problem of queuing multiple types of events on the same list. The Simula approach was to use something called prefix classes . You could write something like this:

link CLASS car; ... implementation of car

link CLASS bicycle; ... implementation of bicycle

The is a prefix class that adds the functionality of linked link lists. This lets you add both cars and bicycles to the list of things waiting at (say) a traffic light. In current terminology, would link be a parent class.

The mental model used by Simula programmers was that the instance data and implementation of class was prepended to link the implementation of classes and . The part was car bicycle link almost viewed as being a container that carried around cars and bicycles. This gave them a form of polymorphism: cars and bicycles both implemented the interface because they both link contained the code. link

After Simula came Smalltalk. Alan Kay, one of the creators of [44] Smalltalk, describes in a 2019 Quora answer why Smalltalk has inheritance:

So when I designed Smalltalk-72—and it was a lark for fun while thinking about Smalltalk-71—I thought it would be fun to use its Lisp-like dynamics to do experiments with “differential programming” (meaning: various ways to accomplish “this is like that except”).

This is subclassing purely for behavior.

These two styles of inheritance (which actually had a fair amount in common) developed over the following decades. The Simula approach, which suggested inheritance was a way of combining types, continued in languages such as C++ and Java. The Smalltalk school, where inheritance was a dynamic organization of behaviors, was seen in languages such as Ruby and JavaScript.

So, now we’re faced with a generation of OO developers who use inheritance for one of two reasons: they don’t like typing, or they like types.

Those who don’t like typing save their fingers by using

inheritance to add common functionality from a base class into child classes: class and class are both subclasses of User Product . ActiveRecord::Base

Those who like types use inheritance to express the relationship between classes: a is-a-kind-of . Car Vehicle

Unfortunately both kinds of inheritance have problems.

### Problems Using Inheritance To Share Code

Inheritance is coupling. Not only is the child class coupled to the parent, the parent’s parent, and so on, but the code that uses the child is also coupled to all the ancestors. Here’s an example:

Vehicle class def initialize @speed = 0 end stop def @speed = 0 end def move_at(speed) @speed = speed end end

class Car < Vehicle def info "I'm car driving at #{ @speed }" end end

```
# top-level code my_ride = Car.new my_ride.move_at(30)
```

When the top-level calls , the method being my_car.move_at invoked is in , the parent of . Vehicle Car

Now the developer in charge of changes the API, so Vehicle becomes , and the instance variable move_at set_velocity @speed becomes . @velocity

An API change is expected to break clients of class. But Vehicle the top-level is not: as far as it is concerned it is using a . Car What the class does in terms of implementation is not the Car concern of the top-level code, but it still breaks.

Similarly the name of an instance variable is purely an internal implementation detail, but when changes it also (silently) Vehicle breaks . Car

So much coupling.

Problems Using Inheritance to Build Types Some folks view inheritance as a way of defining new types. Their favorite design diagram shows class hierarchies. They view problems the way Victorian gentleman scientists viewed nature, as something to be broken down into categories.

Unfortunately, these diagrams soon grow into wall-covering monstrosities, layer-upon-layer added in order to express the smallest nuance of differentiation between classes. This added complexity can make the application more brittle, as changes can ripple up and down many layers.

Even worse, though, is the multiple inheritance issue. A may Car be a kind of , but it can also be a kind of , , Vehicle Asset InsuredItem and so on. Modeling this correctly would need LoanCollateral

multiple inheritance.

C++ gave multiple inheritance a bad name in the 1990s because of some questionable disambiguation semantics. As a result, many current OO languages don’t offer it. So, even if you’re happy with complex type trees, you won’t be able to model your domain accurately anyway.

### Don’t Pay Inheritance Tax

### The Alternatives Are Better

Let us suggest three techniques that mean you should never need to use inheritance again:

Interfaces and protocols

Delegation

Mixins and traits

Interfaces and Protocols

Most OO languages allow you to specify that a class implements one or more sets of behaviors. You could say, for example, that a class implements the behavior and the Car Drivable Locatable behavior. The syntax used for doing this varies: in Java, it might look like this:

Car Drivable, Locatable { public class implements

// Code for class Car. This code must include // the functionality of both Drivable // and Locatable

}

and are what Java calls interfaces ; other Drivable Locatable languages call them protocols , and some call them traits (although this is not what we’ll be calling a trait later).

Interfaces are defined like this:

public interface Drivable { double getSpeed(); void stop(); }

public interface Locatable() { Coordinate getLocation(); boolean locationIsValid(); }

These declarations create no code: they simply say that any class that implements must implement the two methods Drivable and , and a class that’s must implement getSpeed stop Locatable and . This means that our previous class getLocation locationIsValid definition of will only be valid if it includes all four of these Car methods.

What makes interfaces and protocols so powerful is that we can use them as types, and any class that implements the appropriate interface will be compatible with that type. If Car and both implement , we could store both in a list Phone Locatable of locatable items:

List<Locatable> items = new ArrayList<>();

items.add( Car(...)); new items.add( new Phone(...)); items.add( Car(...)); new // ...

We can then process that list, safe in the knowledge that every item has and : getLocation locationIsValid

void printLocation(Locatable item) { (item.locationIsValid() { if print(item.getLocation().asString()); }

// ...

items.forEach(printLocation);

**Tip 51: Prefer Interfaces to Express Polymorphism**

Interfaces and protocols give us polymorphism without inheritance.

Delegation Inheritance encourages developers to create classes whose objects have large numbers of methods. If a parent class has 20 methods, and the subclass wants to make use of just two of them, its objects will still have the other 18 just lying around and callable. The class has lost control of its interface. This is a

common problem—many persistence and UI frameworks insist that application components subclass some supplied base class:

Account < PersistenceBaseClass class end

The class now carries all of the persistence class’s API Account around with it. Instead, imagine an alternative using delegation, as in the following example:

Account class def initialize(. . .) @repo = Persister.for(self) end

save def @repo.save() end end

We now expose none of the framework API to the clients of our class: that decoupling is now broken. But there’s more. Account Now that we’re no longer constrained by the API of the framework we’re using, we’re free to create the API we need. Yes, we could do that before, but we always ran the risk that the interface we wrote can be bypassed, and the persistence API used instead. Now we control everything.

**Tip 52: Delegate to Services: Has-A Trumps Is-A**

In fact, we can take this a step further. Why should an Account have to know how to persist itself? Isn’t its job to know and enforce the account business rules?

class Account # nothing but account stuff

end

AccountRecord class # wraps an account with the ability # to be fetched and stored end

Now we’re really decoupled, but it has come at a cost. We’re having to write more code, and typically some of it will be boilerplate: it’s likely that all our record classes will need a find method, for example.

Fortunately, that’s what mixins and traits do for us.

Mixins, Traits, Categories, Protocol Extensions, … As an industry, we love to give things names. Quite often we’ll give the same thing many names. More is better, right?

That’s what we’re dealing with when we look at mixins. The basic idea is simple: we want to be able to extend classes and objects with new functionality without using inheritance. So we create a set of these functions, give that set a name, and then somehow extend a class or object with them. At that point, you’ve created a new class or object that combines the capabilities of the original and all its mixins. In most cases, you’ll be able to make this extension even if you don’t have access to the source code of the class you’re extending.

Now the implementation and name of this feature varies between languages. We’ll tend to call them mixins here, but we really want you to think of this as a language-agnostic feature. The important thing is the capability that all these implementations have: merging functionality between existing things and new things .

As an example, let’s go back to our example. As we AccountRecord left it, an needed to know about both accounts and AccountRecord about our persistence framework. It also needed to delegate all the methods in the persistence layer that it wanted to expose to the outside world.

Mixins give us an alternative. First, we could write a mixin that implements (for example) two of three of the standard finder methods. We could then add them into as a mixin. AccountRecord And, as we write new classes for persisted things, we can add the mixin to them, too:

mixin CommonFinders { def find(id) { ... } findAll() { ... } def end

AccountRecord BasicRecord CommonFinders class extends with class OrderRecord extends BasicRecord with CommonFinders

We can take this a lot further. For example, we all know our business objects need validation code to prevent bad data from infiltrating our calculations. But exactly what do we mean by validation ?

If we take an account, for example, there are probably many different layers of validation that could be applied:

Validating that a hashed password matches one entered by the user

Validating form data entered by the user when an account is created

Validating form data entered by an admin person updating the user details

Validating data added to the account by other system components

Validating data for consistency before it is persisted

A common (and we believe less-than-ideal) approach is to bundle all the validations into a single class (the business object/persistence object) and then add flags to control which fire in which circumstances.

We think a better way is to use mixins to create specialized classes for appropriate situations:

class AccountForCustomer extends Account AccountValidations,AccountCustomerValidations with

class AccountForAdmin extends Account AccountValidations,AccountAdminValidations with

Here, both derived classes include validations common to all account objects. The customer variant also includes validations appropriate for the customer-facing APIs, while the admin variant contained (the presumably less restrictive) admin validations.

Now, by passing instances of or AccountForCustomer AccountForAdmin back and forth, our code automatically ensures the correct validation is applied.

**Tip 53: Use Mixins to Share Functionality**

### Inheritance Is Rarely The Answer

We’ve had a quick look at three alternatives to traditional class inheritance:

Interfaces and protocols

Delegation

Mixins and traits

Each of these methods may be better for you in different circumstances, depending on whether your goal is sharing type information, adding functionality, or sharing methods. As with anything in programming, aim to use the technique that best expresses your intent.

And try not to drag the whole jungle along for the ride.

### Related Sections Include

Topic 8, The Essence of Good Design

Topic 10, Orthogonality

Topic 28, Decoupling

### Challenges

The next time you find yourself subclassing, take a minute to examine the options. Can you achieve what you want with interfaces, delegation, and/or mixins? Can you reduce coupling by doing so?

> Let all your things have their places; let each part of your business have its time. Benjamin Franklin, Thirteen Virtues, autobiography
