## Topic 32. Configuration

When code relies on values that may change after the application has gone live, keep those values external to the app. When your application will run in different environments, and potentially for different customers, keep the environmentand customerspecific values outside the app. In this way, you’re parameterizing your application; the code adapts to the places it runs.

### Parameterize Your App Using External

**Tip 55: Configuration**

Common things you will probably want to put in configuration data include:

Credentials for external services (database, third party APIs, and so on)

Logging levels and destinations

Port, IP address, machine, and cluster names the app uses

Environment-specific validation parameters

Externally set parameters, such as tax rates

Site-specific formatting details

License keys

Basically, look for anything that you know will have to change that you can express outside your main body of code, and slap it into some configuration bucket.

### Static Configuration

Many frameworks, and quite a few custom applications, keep configuration in either flat files or database tables. If the information is in flat files, the trend is to use some off-the-shelf plain-text format. Currently YAML and JSON are popular for this. Sometimes applications written in scripting languages use special purpose source-code files, dedicated to containing just configuration. If the information is structured, and is likely to be changed by the customer (sales tax rates, for example), it might be better to store it in a database table. And, of course, you can use both, splitting the configuration information according to use.

Whatever form you use, the configuration is read into your application as a data structure, normally when the application starts. Commonly, this data structure is made global, the thinking being that this makes it easier for any part of the code to get to the values it holds.

We prefer that you don’t do that. Instead, wrap the configuration information behind a (thin) API. This decouples your code from the details of the representation of configuration.

### Configuration-As-A-Service

While static configuration is common, we currently favor a

different approach. We still want configuration data kept external to the application, but rather than in a flat file or database, we’d like to see it stored behind a service API. This has a number of benefits:

Multiple applications can share configuration information, with authentication and access control limiting what each can see

Configuration changes can be made globally

The configuration data can be maintained via a specialized UI

The configuration data becomes dynamic

That last point, that configuration should be dynamic, is critical as we move toward highly available applications. The idea that we should have to stop and restart an application to change a single parameter is hopelessly out of touch with modern realities. Using a configuration service, components of the application could register for notifications of updates to parameters they use, and the service could send them messages containing new values if and when they are changed.

Whatever form it takes, configuration data drives the runtime behavior of an application. When configuration values change, there’s no need to rebuild the code.

### Don’T Write Dodo-Code

Without external configuration, your code is not as adaptable or flexible as it could be. Is this a bad thing? Well, out here in the real world, species that don’t adapt die.

The dodo didn’t adapt to the presence of humans and their livestock on the island of Mauritius, and quickly became extinct.

[45]

[45] It was the first documented extinction of a species at the hand of man.

Don’t let your project (or your career) go the way of the dodo.

images/dodo.png

### Related Sections Include

Topic 9, DRY—The Evils of Duplication

Topic 14, Domain Languages

Topic 16, The Power of Plain Text

Topic 28, Decoupling

Don't Overdo It

In the first edition of this book, we suggested using configuration instead of code in a similar fashion, but apparently should have been a little more specific in our instructions. Any advice can be taken to extremes or used inappropriately, so here are a few cautions:

Don’t overdo it. One early client of ours decided that every single field in their application should be configurable. As a result, it took weeks to make even the smallest change, as you had to implement both the field and all the admin code to save and edit it. They had some 40,000 configuration variables and a coding nightmare on their hands.

Don’t push decisions to configuration out of laziness. If there’s genuine debate about whether a feature should work this way or that, or if it should be the users’ choice, try it out one way and get feedback on whether the decision was a good one.

Footnotes

[37] So it’s not really a law. It’s more like The Jolly Good Idea of Demeter.

[38] https://media.pragprog.com/articles/jan_03_enbug.pdf

[39] Yes, we know that Ruby already has this capability with its function. at_exit

[40] https://media.pragprog.com/titles/tpp20/code/event/rxcommon/logger.js

[41] It seems that the first use of the characters as a pipe dates to 1994, in a discussion |> about the language Isobelle/ML, archived at https://blogs.msdn.microsoft.com/dsyme/2011/05/17/archeological-semiotics-thebirth-of-the-pipeline-symbol-1994/

[42] We’ve taken a liberty here. Technically we do execute the following functions. We just don’t execute the code in them.

[43] In fact you could add such an operator to Elixir using its macro facility; an example of this is the Monad library in hex. You could also use Elixir’s construct, but then you with lose much of the sense of writing transformations that you get with pipelines.

[44] https://www.quora.com/What-does-Alan-Kay-think-about-inheritance-in-objectoriented-programming

[45] It didn’t help that the settlers beat the placid (read: stupid ) birds to death with clubs for sport.

Copyright © 2020 Pearson Education, Inc.
