## Topic 42. Property-Based Testing

We recommend writing unit tests for your functions. You do that by thinking about typical things that might be a problem, based on your knowledge of the thing you’re testing.

There’s a small but potentially significant problem lurking in that paragraph, though. If you write the original code and you write the tests, is it possible that an incorrect assumption could be expressed in both? The code passes the tests, because it does what it is supposed to based on your understanding.

One way around this is to have different people write tests and the code under test, but we don’t like this: as we said in Topic 41, Test to Code , one of the biggest benefits of thinking about tests is the way it informs the code you write. You lose that when the work of testing is split from the coding.

Instead, we favor an alternative, where the computer, which doesn’t share your preconceptions, does some testing for you.

### Contracts, Invariants, And Properties

In Topic 23, Design by Contract , we talked about the idea that code has contracts that it meets: you meet the conditions when you feed it input, and it will make certain guarantees about the

outputs it produces.

There are also code invariants , things that remain true about some piece of state when it’s passed through a function. For example, if you sort a list, the result will have the same number of elements as the original—the length is invariant.

Once we work out our contracts and invariants (which we’re going to lump together and call properties ) we can use them to automate our testing. What we end up doing is called propertybased testing .

### Use Property-Based Tests to Validate Your

**Tip 71: Assumptions**

As an artificial example, we can build some tests for our sorted list. We’ve already established one property: the sorted list is the same size as the original. We can also state that no element in the result can be greater than the one that follows it.

We can now express that in code. Most languages have some kind of property-based testing framework. This example is in Python, and uses the Hypothesis tool and pytest, but the principles are pretty universal.

Here is the full source of the tests:

proptest/sort.py

from hypothesis import given import hypothesis.strategies as some

@given (some.lists(some.integers())) test_list_size_is_invariant_across_sorting(a_list): def

original_length = len(a_list) a_list.sort() assert len(a_list) == original_length

(some.lists(some.text())) @given def test_sorted_result_is_ordered(a_list): a_list.sort() for i in range(len(a_list) - 1): a_list[i] <= a_list[i + 1] assert Here’s what happens when we run it:

$ pytest  sort.py ======================= test session starts ======================== ... plugins: hypothesis-4.14.0

sort.py ..                                                    [100%]

===================== 2 passed in 0.95 seconds =====================

Not much drama there. But, behind the scenes, Hypothesis ran both of our tests one hundred times, passing in a different list each time. The lists will have varying lengths, and will have different contents. It’s as if we’d cooked up 200 individual tests with 200 random lists.

### Test Data Generation

Like most property-based testing libraries, Hypothesis gives you a minilanguage for describing the data it should generate. The language is based around calls to functions in the module, which we aliased as , just because hypothesis.strategies some it reads better.

If we wrote:

(some.integers()) @given

Our test function would run multiple times. Each time, it would be passed a different integer. If instead we wrote the following:

(some.integers(min_value=5, max_value=10).map( x: x * @given lambda 2))

then we’d get the even numbers between 10 and 20.

You can also compose types, so that

@given (some.lists(some.integers(min_value=1), max_size=100))

will be lists of natural numbers that are at most 100 elements long.

This isn’t supposed to be a tutorial on any particular framework, so we’ll skip a bunch of cool details and instead look at a realworld example.

### Finding Bad Assumptions

We’re writing a simple order processing and stock control system (because there’s always room for one more). It models the stock levels with a object. We can query a Warehouse warehouse to see if something is in stock, remove things from stock, and get the current stock levels.

Here’s the code:

proptest/stock.py

class Warehouse: __init__(self, stock): def self.stock = stock

def in_stock(self, item_name):

return (item_name in self.stock) and (self.stock[item_name] > 0)

take_from_stock(self, item_name, quantity): def if quantity <= self.stock[item_name]: self.stock[item_name] -= quantity else : Exception( "Oversold {}" .format(item_name)) raise

def stock_count(self, item_name): return self.stock[item_name]

We wrote a basic unit test, which passes:

proptest/stock.py

def test_warehouse(): wh = Warehouse({ "shoes" : 10, "hats" : 2, "umbrellas" : 0}) assert wh.in_stock( "shoes" ) assert wh.in_stock( "hats" ) assert not wh.in_stock( "umbrellas" )

wh.take_from_stock( "shoes" , 2) assert wh.in_stock( "shoes" )

wh.take_from_stock( "hats" , 2) assert not wh.in_stock( "hats" )

Then we wrote a function that processes a request to order items from the warehouse. It returns a tuple where the first element is either or , followed by the item and "ok" "not available" requested quantity. We also wrote some tests, and they pass:

proptest/stock.py

def order(warehouse, item, quantity): warehouse.in_stock(item): if warehouse.take_from_stock(item, quantity) ( "ok" , item, quantity ) return else : ( "not available" , item, quantity ) return

proptest/stock.py

def test_order_in_stock(): wh = Warehouse({ "shoes" : 10, "hats" : 2, "umbrellas" : 0}) status, item, quantity = order(wh, "hats" , 1) assert status   == "ok" assert item     == "hats" assert quantity == 1 assert wh.stock_count( "hats" ) == 1

def test_order_not_in_stock(): wh = Warehouse({ "shoes" : 10, "hats" : 2, "umbrellas" : 0}) status, item, quantity = order(wh, "umbrellas" , 1) status   == "not available" assert assert item     == "umbrellas" quantity == 1 assert assert wh.stock_count( "umbrellas" ) == 0

def test_order_unknown_item(): wh = Warehouse({ "shoes" : 10, "hats" : 2, "umbrellas" : 0}) status, item, quantity = order(wh, "bagel" , 1) assert status   == "not available" assert item     == "bagel" assert quantity == 1

On the surface, everything looks fine. But before we ship the code, let’s add some property tests.

One thing we know is that stock cannot appear and disappear across our transaction. This means that if we take some items from the warehouse, the number we took plus the number currently in the warehouse should be the same as the number originally in the warehouse. In the following test, we run our test with the item parameter chosen randomly from or "hat" and the quantity chosen from 1 to 4: "shoe"

proptest/stock.py

@given (item     = some.sampled_from([ "shoes" , "hats" ]), quantity = some.integers(min_value=1, max_value=4))

def test_stock_level_plus_quantity_equals_original_stock_level(item, quantity): wh = Warehouse({ "shoes" : 10, "hats" : 2, "umbrellas" : 0}) initial_stock_level = wh.stock_count(item) (status, item, quantity) = order(wh, item, quantity) status == "ok" : if assert wh.stock_count(item) + quantity == initial_stock_level

Let’s run it:

$ pytest stock.py . . . stock.py:72: _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ stock.py:76: in test_stock_level_plus_quantity_equals_original_stock_level (status, item, quantity) = order(wh, item, quantity) stock.py:40: in order warehouse.take_from_stock(item, quantity) _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _

self = <stock.Warehouse object at 0x10cf97cf8>, item_name = 'hats' quantity = 3

def take_from_stock(self, item_name, quantity): if quantity <= self.stock[item_name]: self.stock[item_name] -= quantity else: "Oversold {}" > raise Exception( .format(item_name)) E       Exception: Oversold hats

stock.py:16: Exception ---------------------------- Hypothesis ---------------------------- Falsifying example: test_stock_level_plus_quantity_equals_original_stock_level( item='hats', quantity=3)

It blew up in : we tried to remove three warehouse.take_from_stock hats from the warehouse, but it only has two in stock.

Our property testing found a faulty assumption: our in_stock function only checks that there’s at least one of the given item in

stock. Instead we need to make sure we have enough to fill the order:

proptest/stock1.py

def in_stock(self, item_name, quantity): (item_name self.stock) (self.stock[item_name] >= » return in and quantity)

And we change the function, too: order

proptest/stock1.py

def order(warehouse, item, quantity): warehouse.in_stock(item, quantity): » if warehouse.take_from_stock(item, quantity) ( "ok" , item, quantity ) return else : ( "not available" , item, quantity ) return

And now our property test passes.

### Property-Based Tests Often Surprise You

In the previous example, we used a property-based test to check that stock levels were adjusted properly. The test found a bug, but it wasn’t to do with stock level adjustment. Instead, it found a bug in our function. in_stock

This is both the power and the frustration of property-based testing. It’s powerful because you set up some rules for generating inputs, set up some assertions for validating output, and then just let it rip. You never quite know what will happen. The test may pass. An assertion may fail. Or the code may fail totally because it couldn’t handle the inputs it was given.

The frustration is that it can be tricky to pin down what failed.

Our suggestion is that when a property-based test fails, find out what parameters it was passing to the test function, and then use those values to create a separate, regular, unit test. That unit test does two things for you. First, it lets you focus in on the problem without all the additional calls being made into your code by the property-based testing framework. Second, that unit test acts as a regression test . Because property-based tests generate random values that get passed to your test, there’s no guarantee that the same values will be used the next time you run tests. Having a unit test that forces those values to be used ensures that this bug won’t slip through.

### Property-Based Tests Also Help Your Design

When we talked about unit testing, we said that one of the major benefits was the way it made you think about your code: a unit test is the first client of your API.

The same is true of property-based tests, but in a slightly different way. They make you think about your code in terms of invariants and contracts; you think about what must not change, and what must be true. This extra insight has a magical effect on your code, removing edge cases and highlighting functions that leave data in an inconsistent state.

We believe that property-based testing is complementary to unit testing: they address different concerns, and each brings its own benefits. If you’re not currently using them, give them a go.

### Related Sections Include

Topic 23, Design by Contract

Topic 25, Assertive Programming

Topic 45, The Requirements Pit

### Exercises

Exercise 31 ( possible answer )

Look back at the warehouse example. Are there any other properties that you can test?

Exercise 32 ( possible answer )

Your company ships machinery. Each machine comes in a crate, and each crate is rectangular. The crates vary in size. Your job is to write some code to pack as many crates as possible in a single layer that fits in the delivery truck. The output of your code is a list of all the crates. For each crate, the list gives the location in the truck, along with the width and height. What properties of the output could be tested?

### Challenges

Think about the code you’re currently working on. What are the properties: the contracts and invariants? Can you use propertybased testing framework to verify these automatically?

> Good fences make good neighbors. Robert Frost, Mending Wall
