## Topic 44. Naming Things

What’s in a name? When we’re programming, the answer is “everything!”

We create names for applications, subsystems, modules, functions, variables—we’re constantly creating new things and bestowing names on them. And those names are very, very important, because they reveal a lot about your intent and belief.

We believe that things should be named according to the role they play in your code. This means that, whenever you create something, you need to pause and think “what is my motivation to create this?”

This is a powerful question, because it takes you out of the immediate problem-solving mindset and makes you look at the bigger picture. When you consider the role of a variable or function, you’re thinking about what is special about it, about what it can do, and what it interacts with. Often, we find ourselves realizing that what we were about to do made no sense, all because we couldn’t come up with an appropriate name.

There’s some science behind the idea that names are deeply

meaningful. It turns out that the brain can read and understand words really fast: faster than many other activities. This means that words have a certain priority when we try to make sense of [67] something. This can be demonstrated using the Stroop effect.

Look at the following panel. It has a list of color names or shades, and each is shown in a color or shade. But the names and colors don’t necessarily match. Here’s part one of the [68] challenge—say aloud the name of each color as written:

images/stroop_color.png

Now repeat this, but instead say aloud the color used to draw the word. Harder, eh? It’s easy to be fluent when reading, but way harder when trying to recognize colors.

Your brain treats written words as something to be respected. We need to make sure the names we use live up to this.

Let’s look at a couple of examples:

We’re authenticating people who access our site that sells jewelry made from old graphics cards:

let user = authenticate(credentials)

The variable is because it’s always . But why? It means user user

nothing. How about , or ? That way we get constant customer buyer reminders as we code of what this person is trying to do, and what that means to us.

We have an instance method that discounts an order:

public void deductPercent( double amount) // ...

Two things here. First, is what it does and not why it deductPercent does it . Then the name of the parameter is at best amount misleading: is it an absolute amount, a percentage? Perhaps this would be better:

applyDiscount(Percentage discount) public void // ...

The method name now makes its intent clear. We’ve also changed the parameter from a to a , a type we’ve defined. double Percentage We don’t know about you, but when dealing with percentages we never know if the value is supposed to be between 0 and 100 or 0.0 and 1.0. Using a type documents what the function expects.

We have a module that does interesting things with Fibonacci numbers. One of those things is to calculate the number in the sequence. Stop and think what you’d call this function. Most people we ask would call it . Seems reasonable, but fib remember it will normally be called in the context of its module, so the call would be . How about calling it or instead: Fib.fib(n) of nth

Fib.of(0) # => 0 Fib.nth(20) # => 4181

When naming things, you’re constantly looking for ways of clarifying what you mean, and that act of clarification will lead you to a better understanding of your code as you write it.

However, not all names have to be candidates for a literary prize.

The Exception That Proves the Rule

While we strive for clarity in code, branding is a different matter entirely.

There’s a well-established tradition that projects and project teams should have obscure, “clever” names. Names of Pokémon, Marvel superheroes, cute mammals, Lord of the Rings characters, you name it.

Literally.

### Honor The Culture

Most introductory computer texts will admonish you never to [69] use single letter variables such as , , or . i j k

We think they’re wrong. Sort of.

In fact, it depends on the culture of that particular programming language or environment. In the C programming language, , , and are traditionally used as loop increment i j k variables, is used for a character string, and so on. If you s program in that environment, that’s what you are used to seeing and it would be jarring (and hence wrong) to violate that norm. On the other hand, using that convention in a different environment where it’s not expected is just as wrong. You’d never do something heinous like this Clojure example which assigns a string to variable : i

( [i "Hello World" ] let (println i))

Some language communities prefer , with embedded camelCase capital letters, while others prefer with embedded snake_case underscores to separate words. The languages themselves will of course accept either, but that doesn’t make it right. Honor the local culture.

Some languages allow a subset of Unicode in names. Get a sense of what the community expects before going all cute with names like or . ɹǝsn εξέρχεται

### Consistency

Emerson is famous for writing “A foolish consistency is the hobgoblin of little minds…,” but Emerson wasn’t on a team of programmers.

Every project has its own vocabulary: jargon words that have a special meaning to the team. “Order” means one thing to a team creating an online store, and something very different to a team whose app charts the lineage of religious groups. It’s important that everyone on the team knows what these words mean, and that they use them consistently.

One way is to encourage a lot of communication. If everyone pair programs, and pairs switch frequently, then jargon will spread osmotically.

Another way is to have a project glossary, listing the terms that have special meaning to the team. This is an informal document, possibly maintained on a wiki, possibly just index cards on a wall somewhere.

After a while, the project jargon will take on a life of its own. As everyone gets comfortable with the vocabulary, you’ll be able to use the jargon as a shorthand, expressing a lot of meaning accurately and concisely. (This is exactly what a pattern language is.)

### Renaming Is Even Harder

No matter how much effort you put in up front, things change. Code is refactored, usage shifts, meaning becomes subtly altered. If you aren’t vigilant about updating names as you go, you can quickly descend into a nightmare much worse than meaningless names: misleading names. Have you ever had someone explain inconsistencies in code such as, “The routine called really writes data to an archive file”? getData

As we discuss in Topic 3, Software Entropy , when you spot a problem, fix it—right here and now. When you see a name that no longer expresses the intent, or is misleading or confusing, fix it. You’ve got full regression tests, so you’ll spot any instances you may have missed.

### Name Well; Rename When Needed

If for some reason you can’t change the now-wrong name, then you’ve got a bigger problem: an ETC violation (see Topic 8, The Essence of Good Design ). Fix that first, then change the offending name. Make renaming easy, and do it often.

Otherwise you’ll have to explain to the new folks on the team that really writes data to a file, and you’ll have to do it getData with a straight face.

### Related Sections Include

Topic 3, Software Entropy

Topic 40, Refactoring

Topic 45, The Requirements Pit

### Challenges

When you find a function or method with an overly generic name, try and rename it to express all the things it really does. Now it’s an easier target for refactoring.

In our examples, we suggested using more specific names such as buyer instead of the more traditional and generic user. What other names do you habitually use that could be better?

Are the names in your system congruent with user terms from the domain? If not, why? Does this cause a Stroop-effect style cognitive dissonance for the team?

Are names in your system hard to change? What can you do to fix that particular broken window?

Footnotes

[50] Note from the battle-scarred: UTC is there for a reason. Use it.

[51] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Correlation_does_not_imply_causation

[52] See Topic 50, Coconuts Don’t Cut It .

[53] You can also go too far here. We once knew a developer who rewrote all source he was given because he had his own naming conventions.

[54] https://mediaorigin.pragprog.com/titles/tpp20/code/algorithm_speed/sort/src/main.rs

[55] And yes, we did voice our concerns over the title.

[56] Originally spotted in UML Distilled: A Brief Guide to the Standard Object Modeling Language [Fow00] .

[57] This is excellent advice in general (see Topic 27, Don’t Outrun Your Headlights ).

[58] Some folks argue that test-first and test-driven development are two different things, saying that the intents of the two are different. However, historically, test-first (which comes from eXtreme Programming) was identical to what people now call TDD.

[59] https://ronjeffries.com/categories/sudoku . A big “thank you” to Ron for letting us use this story.

[60] http://norvig.com/sudoku.html

We’ve been trying since at least 1986, when Cox and Novobilski coined the term [61] “software IC” in their Objective-C book Object-Oriented Programming Object-Oriented Programming: An Evolutionary Approach [CN91] .

[62] See Topic 20, Debugging .

[63] Remember our good friend, little Bobby Tables ( https://xkcd.com/327 )? While you’re reminiscing have a look at https://bobby-tables.com , which lists ways of sanitizing data passed to database queries.

[64] This technique has proven to be successful at the CPU chip level, where well-known exploits target debugging and administrative facilities. Once cracked, the entire machine is left exposed.

[65] NIST Special Publication 800-63B: Digital Identity Guidelines: Authentication and Lifecycle Management , available free online at https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800- 63b

[66] Unless you have a PhD in cryptography, and even then only with major peer review, extensive field trials with a bug bounty, and budget for long-term maintenance.

[67] Studies of Interference in Serial Verbal Reactions [Str35]

[68] We have two versions of this panel. One uses different colors, and the other uses shades of gray. If you’re seeing this in black and white and want the color version, or if you’re having trouble distinguishing colors and want to try the grayscale version, pop over to https://pragprog.com/the-pragmatic-programmer/stroop-effect .

[69] Do you know why is commonly used as a loop variable? The answer comes from over i 60 years ago, when variables starting with through were integers in the original I N FORTRAN. And FORTRAN was in turn influenced by algebra.

Copyright © 2020 Pearson Education, Inc.
