## Topic 51. Pragmatic Starter Kit

Back when cars were a novelty, the instructions for starting a Model-T Ford were more than two pages long. With modern cars, you just push a button—the starting procedure is automatic and foolproof. A person following a list of instructions might flood the engine, but the automatic starter won’t.

Although software development is still an industry at the Model-T stage, we can’t afford to go through two pages of instructions again and again for some common operation. Whether it is the build and release procedure, testing, project paperwork, or any other recurring task on the project, it has to be automatic and repeatable on any capable machine.

In addition, we want to ensure consistency and repeatability on the project. Manual procedures leave consistency up to chance; repeatability isn’t guaranteed, especially if aspects of the procedure are open to interpretation by different people.

After we wrote the first edition of The Pragmatic Programmer, we wanted to create more books to help teams develop software. We figured we should start at the beginning: what are the most

basic, most important elements that every team needs regardless of methodology, language, or technology stack. And so the idea of the Pragmatic Starter Kit was born, covering these three critical and interrelated topics:

Version Control

Regression Testing

Full Automation

These are the three legs that support every project. Here’s how.

### Drive With Version Control

As we said in Topic 19, Version Control , you want to keep everything needed to build your project under version control. That idea becomes even more important in the context of the project itself.

First, it allows build machines to be ephemeral. Instead of one hallowed, creaky machine in the corner of the office that [80] everyone is afraid to touch, build machines and/or clusters are created on demand as spot instances in the cloud. Deployment configuration is under version control as well, so releasing to production can be handled automatically.

And that’s the important part: at the project level, version control drives the build and release process.

### Use Version Control to Drive Builds, Tests, and

**Tip 89: Releases**

That is, build, test, and deployment are triggered via commits or

pushes to version control, and built in a container in the cloud. Release to staging or production is specified by using a tag in your version control system. Releases then become a much more low-ceremony part of every day life—true continuous delivery, not tied to any one build machine or developer’s machine.

### Ruthless And Continuous Testing

Many developers test gently, subconsciously knowing where the code will break and avoiding the weak spots. Pragmatic Programmers are different. We are driven to find our bugs now , so we don’t have to endure the shame of others finding our bugs later.

Finding bugs is somewhat like fishing with a net. We use fine, small nets (unit tests) to catch the minnows, and big, coarse nets (integration tests) to catch the killer sharks. Sometimes the fish manage to escape, so we patch any holes that we find, in hopes of catching more and more slippery defects that are swimming about in our project pool.

### Test Early, Test Often, Test Automatically

We want to start testing as soon as we have code. Those tiny minnows have a nasty habit of becoming giant, man-eating sharks pretty fast, and catching a shark is quite a bit harder. So we write unit tests. A lot of unit tests.

In fact, a good project may well have more test code than production code. The time it takes to produce this test code is worth the effort. It ends up being much cheaper in the long run, and you actually stand a chance of producing a product with

close to zero defects.

Additionally, knowing that you’ve passed the test gives you a high degree of confidence that a piece of code is “done.’’

**Tip 90: Coding Ain’t Done ’Til All the Tests Run**

The automatic build runs all available tests. It’s important to aim to “test for real,” in other words, the test environment should match the production environment closely. Any gaps are where bugs breed.

The build may cover several major types of software testing: unit testing; integration testing; validation and verification; and performance testing.

This list is by no means complete, and some specialized projects will require various other types of testing as well. But it gives us a good starting point.

Unit Testing A unit test is code that exercises a module. We covered this in Topic 41, Test to Code . Unit testing is the foundation of all the other forms of testing that we’ll discuss in this section. If the parts don’t work by themselves, they probably won’t work well together. All of the modules you are using must pass their own unit tests before you can proceed.

Once all of the pertinent modules have passed their individual tests, you’re ready for the next stage. You need to test how all the modules use and interact with each other throughout the system.

Integration Testing Integration testing shows that the major subsystems that make up the project work and play well with each other. With good contracts in place and well tested, any integration issues can be detected easily. Otherwise, integration becomes a fertile breeding ground for bugs. In fact, it is often the single largest source of bugs in the system.

Integration testing is really just an extension of the unit testing we’ve described—you’re just testing how entire subsystems honor their contracts.

Validation and Verification As soon as you have an executable user interface or prototype, you need to answer an all-important question: the users told you what they wanted, but is it what they need?

Does it meet the functional requirements of the system? This, too, needs to be tested. A bug-free system that answers the wrong question isn’t very useful. Be conscious of end-user access patterns and how they differ from developer test data (for an example, see the story about brush strokes here ).

Performance Testing Performance or stress testing may be important aspects of the project as well.

Ask yourself if the software meets the performance requirements under real-world conditions—with the expected number of users, or connections, or transactions per second. Is it scalable?

For some applications, you may need specialized testing

hardware or software to simulate the load realistically.

Testing the Tests Because we can’t write perfect software, it follows that we can’t write perfect test software either. We need to test the tests.

Think of our set of test suites as an elaborate security system, designed to sound the alarm when a bug shows up. How better to test a security system than to try to break in?

After you have written a test to detect a particular bug, cause the bug deliberately and make sure the test complains. This ensures that the test will catch the bug if it happens for real.

**Tip 91: Use Saboteurs to Test Your Testing**

If you are really serious about testing, take a separate branch of the source tree, introduce bugs on purpose, and verify that the tests will catch them. At a higher level, you can use something [81] like Netflix’s Chaos Monkey to disrupt (i.e., “kill”) services and test your application’s resilience.

When writing tests, make sure that alarms sound when they should.

Testing Thoroughly Once you are confident that your tests are correct, and are finding bugs you create, how do you know if you have tested the code base thoroughly enough?

The short answer is “you don’t,’’ and you never will. You might look to try coverage analysis tools that watch your code during

testing and keep track of which lines of code have been executed and which haven’t. These tools help give you a general feel for how comprehensive your testing is, but don’t expect to see 100% [82] coverage.

Even if you do happen to hit every line of code, that’s not the whole picture. What is important is the number of states that your program may have. States are not equivalent to lines of code. For instance, suppose you have a function that takes two integers, each of which can be a number from 0 to 999:

test( a, b) { int int int return a / (a + b); }

In theory, this three-line function has 1,000,000 logical states, 999,999 of which will work correctly and one that will not (when equals zero). Simply knowing that you executed this a + b line of code doesn’t tell you that—you would need to identify all possible states of the program. Unfortunately, in general this is a really hard problem. Hard as in, “The sun will be a cold hard lump before you can solve it.”

**Tip 92: Test State Coverage, Not Code Coverage**

Property-Based Testing A great way to explore how your code handles unexpected states is to have a computer generate those states.

Use property-based testing techniques to generate test data according to the contracts and invariants of the code under test. We cover this topic in detail in Topic 42, Property-Based Testing .

### Tightening The Net

Finally, we’d like to reveal the single most important concept in testing. It is an obvious one, and virtually every textbook says to do it this way. But for some reason, most projects still do not.

If a bug slips through the net of existing tests, you need to add a new test to trap it next time.

**Tip 93: Find Bugs Once**

Once a human tester finds a bug, it should be the last time a human tester finds that bug. The automated tests should be modified to check for that particular bug from then on, every time, with no exceptions, no matter how trivial, and no matter how much the developer complains and says, “Oh, that will never happen again.”

Because it will happen again. And we just don’t have the time to go chasing after bugs that the automated tests could have found for us. We have to spend our time writing new code—and new bugs.

### Full Automation

As we said at the beginning of this section, modern development relies on scripted, automatic procedures. Whether you use something as simple as shell scripts with rsync and ssh, or full-featured solutions such as Ansible, Puppet, Chef, or Salt, just don’t rely on any manual intervention.

Once upon a time, we were at a client site where all the developers were using the same IDE. Their system administrator gave each developer a set of instructions on

installing add-on packages to the IDE. These instructions filled many pages—pages full of click here, scroll there, drag this, double-click that, and do it again.

Not surprisingly, every developer’s machine was loaded slightly differently. Subtle differences in the application’s behavior occurred when different developers ran the same code. Bugs would appear on one machine but not on others. Tracking down version differences of any one component usually revealed a surprise.

**Tip 94: Don’t Use Manual Procedures**

People just aren’t as repeatable as computers are. Nor should we expect them to be. A shell script or program will execute the same instructions, in the same order, time after time. It is under version control itself, so you can examine changes to the build/release procedures over time as well (“but it used to work…”).

Everything depends on automation. You can’t build the project on an anonymous cloud server unless the build is fully automatic. You can’t deploy automatically if there are manual steps involved. And once you introduce manual steps (“just for [83] this one part…”) you’ve broken a very large window.

With these three legs of version control, ruthless testing, and full automation, your project will have the firm foundation you need so you can concentrate on the hard part: delighting users.

### Related Sections Include

Topic 11, Reversibility

Topic 12, Tracer Bullets

Topic 17, Shell Games

Topic 19, Version Control

Topic 41, Test to Code

Topic 49, Pragmatic Teams

Topic 50, Coconuts Don’t Cut It

### Challenges

Are your nightly or continuous builds automatic, but deploying to production isn’t? Why? What’s special about that server?

Can you automatically test your project completely? Many teams are forced to answer “no.” Why? Is it too hard to define the acceptable results? Won’t this make it hard to prove to the sponsors that the project is “done”?

Is it too hard to test the application logic independent of the GUI? What does this say about the GUI? About coupling?

> When you enchant people, your goal is not to make money from them or to get them to do what you want, but to fill them with great delight. Guy Kawasaki
