## Topic 53. Pride and Prejudice

Pragmatic Programmers don’t shirk from responsibility. Instead, we rejoice in accepting challenges and in making our expertise well known. If we are responsible for a design, or a piece of code, we do a job we can be proud of.

### Sign Your Work

Artisans of an earlier age were proud to sign their work. You should be, too.

Project teams are still made up of people, however, and this rule can cause trouble. On some projects, the idea of code ownership can cause cooperation problems. People may become territorial, or unwilling to work on common foundation elements. The project may end up like a bunch of insular little fiefdoms. You become prejudiced in favor of your code and against your coworkers.

That’s not what we want. You shouldn’t jealously defend your code against interlopers; by the same token, you should treat other people’s code with respect. The Golden Rule (“Do unto others as you would have them do unto you’’) and a foundation of mutual respect among the developers is critical to make this tip work.

Anonymity, especially on large projects, can provide a breeding ground for sloppiness, mistakes, sloth, and bad code. It becomes too easy to see yourself as just a cog in the wheel, producing lame excuses in endless status reports instead of good code.

While code must be owned, it doesn’t have to be owned by an [84] individual. In fact, Kent Beck’s eXtreme Programming recommends communal ownership of code (but this also requires additional practices, such as pair programming, to guard against the dangers of anonymity).

We want to see pride of ownership. “I wrote this, and I stand behind my work.” Your signature should come to be recognized as an indicator of quality. People should see your name on a piece of code and expect it to be solid, well written, tested, and documented. A really professional job. Written by a professional.

A Pragmatic Programmer.

Thank you.

images/dave_and_andy.png

> In the long run, we shape our lives, and we shape ourselves. The process never ends until we die. And the choices we make are ultimately our own responsibility. Eleanor Roosevelt

Footnotes

[75] As team size grows, communication paths grow at the rate of , where is the number of team members. On larger teams, communication begins to break down and becomes ineffective.

[76] A burnup chart is better for this than the more usual burndown chart. With a burnup chart, you can clearly see how the additional features move the goalposts.

[77] The team speaks with one voice—externally. Internally, we strongly encourage lively, robust debate. Good developers tend to be passionate about their work.

[78] Andy has met teams who conduct their daily Scrum standups on Fridays.

[79] See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cargo_cult .

[80] We’ve seen this first-hand more times than you’d think.

[81] https://netflix.github.io/chaosmonkey

[82] For an interesting study of the correlation between test coverage and defects, see Mythical Unit Test Coverage [ADSS18] .

[83] Always remember Topic 3, Software Entropy . Always.

[84] http://www.extremeprogramming.org

Copyright © 2020 Pearson Education, Inc.
