# Bibliography

Vard Antinyan, Jesper Derehag, Anna Sandberg, and [ADSS18 Miroslaw Staron. Mythical Unit Test Coverage. IEEE ] Software . 35:73-79, 2018. Jackie Andrade. What does doodling do? Applied [And10] Cognitive Psychology . 24(1):100-106, 2010, January. Joe Armstrong. Programming Erlang: Software for a [Arm07] Concurrent World . The Pragmatic Bookshelf, Raleigh, NC, 2007. Albert J. Bernstein and Sydney Craft Rozen. Dinosaur [BR89] Brains: Dealing with All Those Impossible People at Work . John Wiley & Sons, New York, NY, 1989. Frederick P. Brooks, Jr. The Mythical Man-Month: [Bro96] Essays on Software Engineering . Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, Anniversary, 1996. Brad J. Cox and Andrew J. Novobilski. Object-Oriented [CN91] Programming: An Evolutionary Approach . Addison- Wesley, Reading, MA, Second, 1991. Melvin E. Conway. How do Committees Invent? [Con68] Datamation . 14(5):28-31, 1968, April. Gavin de Becker. The Gift of Fear: And Other Survival [de 98] Signals That Protect Us from Violence . Dell Publishing, New York City, 1998. Tom DeMacro and Tim Lister. Peopleware: Productive [DL13] Projects and Teams . Addison-Wesley, Boston, MA, Third, 2013. Martin Fowler. UML Distilled: A Brief Guide to the [Fow00] Standard Object Modeling Language . Addison-

Wesley, Boston, MA, Second, 2000. Martin Fowler. UML Distilled: A Brief Guide to the [Fow04] Standard Object Modeling Language . Addison- Wesley, Boston, MA, Third, 2004. Martin Fowler. Refactoring: Improving the Design of [Fow19] Existing Code . Addison-Wesley, Boston, MA, Second, 2019. Erich Gamma, Richard Helm, Ralph Johnson, and John [GHJV9 Vlissides. Design Patterns: Elements of Reusable 5] Object-Oriented Software . Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1995. Michael Holt. Math Puzzles & Games . Dorset House, [Hol92] New York, NY, 1992. Andy Hunt. Pragmatic Thinking and Learning: [Hun08] Refactor Your Wetware . The Pragmatic Bookshelf, Raleigh, NC, 2008. T.E. Joiner. Contagious depression: Existence, specificity to [Joi94] depressed symptoms, and the role of reassurance seeking. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology . 67(2):287--296, 1994, August. Donald E. Knuth. The Art of Computer Programming, [Knu11] Volume 4A: Combinatorial Algorithms, Part 1 . Addison-Wesley, Boston, MA, 2011. Donald E. Knuth. The Art of Computer Programming, [Knu98] Volume 1: Fundamental Algorithms . Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, Third, 1998. Donald E. Knuth. The Art of Computer Programming, [Knu98a Volume 2: Seminumerical Algorithms . Addison- ] Wesley, Reading, MA, Third, 1998. Donald E. Knuth. The Art of Computer Programming, [Knu98b Volume 3: Sorting and Searching . Addison-Wesley, ] Reading, MA, Second, 1998. Brian W. Kernighan and Rob Pike. The Practice of [KP99] Programming . Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1999. Bertrand Meyer. Object-Oriented Software [Mey97] Construction . Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, Second, 1997. Jerry Z. Muller. The Tyranny of Metrics . Princeton [Mul18] University Press, Princeton NJ, 2018.

> I would rather have questions that can’t be answered than answers that can’t be questioned. Richard Feynman

Robert Sedgewick and Phillipe Flajolet. An Introduction [SF13] to the Analysis of Algorithms . Addison-Wesley, Boston, MA, Second, 2013. James Ridley Stroop. Studies of Interference in Serial Verbal [Str35] Reactions. Journal of Experimental Psychology . 18:643--662, 1935. Robert Sedgewick and Kevin Wayne. Algorithms . Addison- [SW11] Wesley, Boston, MA, Fourth, 2011. Nassim Nicholas Taleb. The Black Swan: Second [Tal10] Edition: The Impact of the Highly Improbable . Random House, New York, NY, Second, 2010. James Q. Wilson and George Helling. The police and [WH82] neighborhood safety. The Atlantic Monthly . 249[3]:29- -38, 1982, March. Edward Yourdon and Larry L. Constantine. Structured [YC79] Design: Fundamentals of a Discipline of Computer Program and Systems Design . Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1979. Edward Yourdon. When good-enough software is best. IEEE [You95] Software . 1995, May.

Copyright © 2020 Pearson Education, Inc.

Answer 1 (from exercise 1 )

To our way of thinking, class is more orthogonal. It Split2 concentrates on its own task, splitting lines, and ignores details such as where the lines are coming from. Not only does this make the code easier to develop, but it also makes it more flexible. can split lines read from a file, generated by Split2 another routine, or passed in via the environment.

Answer 2 (from exercise 2 )

Let’s start with an assertion: you can write good, orthogonal code in just about any language. At the same time, every language has temptations: features that can lead to increased coupling and decreased orthogonality.

In OO languages, features such as multiple inheritance, exceptions, operator overloading, and parent-method overriding (via subclassing) provide ample opportunity to increase coupling in nonobvious ways. There is also a kind of coupling because a class couples code to data. This is normally a good thing (when coupling is good, we call it cohesion). But if you don’t make your classes focused enough, it can lead to some pretty ugly interfaces.

In functional languages, you’re encouraged to write lots of small, decoupled functions, and to combine them in different ways to solve your problem. In theory this sounds good. In practice it often is. But there’s a form of coupling that can happen here, too. These functions typically transform data, which means the result of one function can become the input to another. If you’re not careful, making a change to the data format a function generates can result in a failure somewhere down the transformational stream. Languages with good type systems can help mitigate this.
