Throughout the book, you will be presented with real-life libraries and technologies, such as LevelDB, Redis, RabbitMQ, ZeroMQ, Express, and many others. They will be used to demonstrate a pattern or technique, and besides making the example more useful, these will also give you great exposure to the Node.js ecosystem and its set of solutions.

Whether you use or plan to use Node.js for your work, your side project, or for an open source project, recognizing and using well-known patterns and techniques will allow you to use a common language when sharing your code and design, and on top of that, it will help you get a better understanding of the future of Node.js and how to make your own contributions a part of it.

## What you need for this book

To experiment with the code, you will need a working installation of Node.js version 14 (or greater) and npm version 6 (or greater). If some examples will require you to use some extra tooling, these will be described accordingly in place. You will also need to be familiar with the command line, know how to install an npm package, and know how to run Node.js applications. Finally, you will need a text editor to work with the code and a modern web browser.

## Who this book is for

This book is for developers who have already had initial contact with Node.js and now want to get the most out of it in terms of productivity, design quality, and scalability. You are only required to have some prior exposure to the technology through some basic examples and some degree of familiarity with the JavaScript language, since this book will cover some basic concepts as well. Developers with intermediate experience in Node.js will also find the techniques presented in this book beneficial.

Some background in software design theory is also an advantage to understand some of the concepts presented.

This book assumes that you have a working knowledge of web application development, web services, databases, and data structures.

## What this book covers

Chapter 1, The Node.js Platform, serves as an introduction to the world of Node.js application design by showing the patterns at the core of the platform itself. It covers the Node.js ecosystem and its philosophy, and provides a quick introduction to the Node.js internals and the reactor pattern.

Chapter 2, The Module System, dives into the module systems available in Node.js, underlining the differences between CommonJS and the more modern ES modules from the ECMAScript 2015 specification.

Chapter 3, Callbacks and Events, introduces the first steps towards learning asynchronous coding and its patterns, discussing and comparing callbacks and the event emitter (observer pattern).

Chapter 4, Asynchronous Control Flow Patterns with Callbacks, introduces a set of patterns and techniques for efficiently handling asynchronous control flow in Node.js using callbacks. This chapter teaches you some traditional ways to mitigate the "callback hell" problem using plain JavaScript.

Chapter 5, Asynchronous Control Flow Patterns with Promises and Async/Await, progresses with the exploration of more sophisticated and modern asynchronous control flow techniques.

Chapter 6, Coding with Streams, dives deep into one of the most important tools in Node.js: streams. It shows you how to process data with transform streams and how to combine them into different patterns.

Chapter 7, Creational Design Patterns, starts to explore the traditional design patterns in Node.js. In this chapter, you will learn about some of the most popular creational design patterns, namely the Factory pattern, the Revealing Constructor pattern, the Builder pattern, and the Singleton pattern.

Chapter 8, Structural Design Patterns, continues the exploration of traditional design patterns in Node.js, covering structural design patterns such as Proxy, Decorator, and Adapter.

Chapter 9, Behavioral Design Patterns, concludes the conversation around traditional design patterns in Node.js by introducing behavioral design patterns like Strategy, State, Template, Middleware, Command, and Iterator.

Chapter 10, Universal JavaScript for Web Applications, explores one of the most interesting capabilities of modern JavaScript web applications: being able to share code between the frontend and the backend. Throughout this chapter, you will learn the basic principles of Universal JavaScript by building a simple web application using modern tools and libraries. Chapter 11, Advanced Recipes, takes a problem-solution approach to show you how some common coding and design intricacies can be approached with ready-to-use solutions.

Chapter 12, Scalability and Architectural Patterns, teaches you the basic techniques and patterns for scaling a Node.js application.

Chapter 13, Messaging and Integration Patterns, presents the most important messaging patterns, teaching you how to build and integrate complex distributed systems using Node.js and its ecosystem.

## To get the most out of this book

To get the most out of this book you can download the example code files and the color images as per the instructions below.

### Download the example code files

You can download the example code files for this book from your account at `www.` `packt.com/`. If you purchased this book elsewhere, you can visit `www.packtpub.com/` `support` and register to have the files emailed directly to you.

You can download the code files by following these steps:

1. Log in or register at `http://www.packt.com`.
2. Select the Support tab.
3. Click on Code Downloads.
4. Enter the name of the book in the Search box and follow the on-screen instructions.

Once the file is downloaded, please make sure that you unzip or extract the folder using the latest version of:

- WinRAR / 7-Zip for Windows
- Zipeg / iZip / UnRarX for macOS
- 7-Zip / PeaZip for Linux

The code bundle for the book is also hosted on GitHub at `nodejsdp.link/repo`. In case there's an update to the code, it will be updated on the existing GitHub repository.

We also have other code bundles from our rich catalog of books and videos available at `https://github.com/PacktPublishing/`. Check them out!

### Download the color images

We also provide a PDF file that has color images of the screenshots/diagrams used in this book. You can download it here: `https://static.packt-cdn.com/` `downloads/9781839214110_ColorImages.pdf`.

### Conventions used

In this book, you will find a number of text styles that distinguish between different kinds of information. Here are some examples of these styles and an explanation of their meaning:

- Code words in text: `server.listen(handle)`
- Pathname: `src/app.js`
- Dummy URL: `http://localhost:8080`

A block of code is generally formatted using StandardJS conventions (`nodejsdp.link/standard`) and it is set as follows:

```js
import zmq from 'zeromq'
async function main () {
  const sink = new zmq.Pull()
  await sink.bind('tcp://*:5017')
  for await (const rawMessage of sink) {
    console.log('Message from worker: ', rawMessage.toString())
  }
}
```

When we wish to draw your attention to a particular part of a code block, the relevant lines or items are highlighted in bold:

```js
const wss = new ws.Server({ server })
wss.on('connection', client => {
  console.log('Client connected')
  client.on('message', msg => {
    console.log(`Message: ${msg}`)
    redisPub.publish('chat_messages', msg)
  })
})
```

Any command-line input or output is written as follows:

```js
node replier.js
node requestor.js
```

New terms and important words are shown in bold. Words that you see on the screen, for example, in menus or dialog boxes, appear in the text like this: "To explain the problem, we will create a little web spider, a command-line application that takes in a web URL as the input and downloads its contents locally into a file."

Warnings or important notes appear like this.

Tips and tricks appear like this.

Most URLs are linked through our own short URL system to make it easier for readers coming through the print edition to access them. These links are in the form `nodejsdp.link/some-descriptive-id`.

## Get in touch

Feedback from our readers is always welcome.

General feedback: If you have questions about any aspect of this book, mention the book title in the subject of your message and email us at `customercare@packtpub.` `com`.

Errata: Although we have taken every care to ensure the accuracy of our content, mistakes do happen. If you have found a mistake in this book, we would be grateful if you could report this to us. Please visit `www.packtpub.com/support/errata`, select your book, click on the Errata Submission Form link, and enter the details.

Piracy: If you come across any illegal copies of our works in any form on the Internet, we would be grateful if you could provide us with the location address or website name. Please contact us at `copyright@packt.com` with a link to the material.

If you are interested in becoming an author: If there is a topic that you have expertise in and you are interested in either writing or contributing to a book, please visit `authors.packtpub.com`.

### Reviews

Please leave a review. Once you have read and used this book, why not leave a review on the site that you purchased it from? Potential readers can then see and use your unbiased opinion to make purchase decisions, we at Packt can understand what you think about our products, and our authors can see your feedback on their book. Thank you!

For more information about Packt, please visit `packt.com`.
